THE SAYINGS OF MENCIUS



BOOK I

KING HWUY OF LËANG


Part I

Mencius went to see King Hwuy of Lëang. [1] The king said, "Venerable
Sir, since you have not counted it far to come here a distance of a
thousand li, may I presume that you are likewise provided with counsels
to profit my kingdom?" Mencius replied, "Why must your Majesty used that
word 'profit'? What I am likewise provided with are counsels to
benevolence and righteousness; and these are my only topics.

"If your Majesty say, 'What is to be done to profit my kingdom?' the
great officers will say, 'What is to be done to profit our families?'
and the inferior officers and the common people will say, 'What is to be
done to profit our persons?' Superiors and inferiors will try to take
the profit the one from the other, and the kingdom will be endangered.
In the kingdom of ten thousand chariots, the murderer of his ruler will
be the chief of a family of a thousand chariots. In the State of a
thousand chariots, the murderer of his ruler will be the chief of a
family of a hundred chariots. To have a thousand in ten thousand, and a
hundred in a thousand, cannot be regarded as not a large allowance; but
if righteousness be put last and profit first, they will not be
satisfied without snatching all.

"There never was a man trained to benevolence who neglected his parents.
There never was a man trained to righteousness who made his ruler an
after consideration. Let your Majesty likewise make benevolence and
righteousness your only themes--Why must you speak of profit?"

When Mencius, another day, was seeing King Hwuy of Lëang, the King went
and stood with him by a pond, and, looking round on the wild geese and
deer, large and small, said, "Do wise and good princes also take
pleasure in these things?" Mencius replied, "Being wise and good, they
then have pleasure in these things. If they are not wise and good,
though they have these things, they do not find pleasure." It is said in
the 'Book of Poetry':--

  'When he planned the commencement of the Marvellous tower,
  He planned it, and defined it,
  And the people in crowds undertook the work,
  And in no time completed it.
  When he planned the commencement, he said, "Be not in a hurry."
  But the people came as if they were his children.
  The king was in the Marvellous park,
  Where the does were lying down--
  The does so sleek and fat;
  With the white birds glistening.
  The king was by the Marvellous pond;--
  How full was it of fishes leaping about!'

King Wan used the strength of the people to make his tower and pond, and
the people rejoiced to do the work, calling the tower 'the Marvellous
Tower,' and the pond 'the Marvellous Pond,' and being glad that he had
his deer, his fishes and turtles. The ancients caused their people to
have pleasure as well as themselves, and therefore they could enjoy it.

"In the Declaration of T'ang it is said, 'O Sun, when wilt thou expire?
We will die together with thee.' The people wished for Këeh's death,
though they should die with him. Although he had his tower, his pond,
birds and animals, how could he have pleasure alone?"

King Hwuy of Lëang said, "Small as my virtue is, in the government of my
kingdom, I do indeed exert my mind to the utmost. If the year be bad
inside the Ho, I remove as many of the people as I can to the east of
it, and convey grain to the country inside. If the year be bad on the
east of the river, I act on the same plan. On examining the governmental
methods of the neighboring kingdoms, I do not find there is any ruler
who exerts his mind as I do. And yet the people of the neighboring kings
do not decrease, nor do my people increase--how is this?"

Mencius replied, "Your Majesty loves war; allow me to take an
illustration from war. The soldiers move forward at the sound of the
drum; and when the edges of their weapons have been crossed, on one
side, they throw away their buff coats, trail their weapons behind them,
and run. Some run a hundred paces and then stop; some run fifty paces
and stop. What would you think if these, because they had run but fifty
paces, should laugh at those who ran a hundred paces?" The king said,
"They cannot do so. They only did not run a hundred paces; but they also
ran." Mencius said, "Since your Majesty knows this you have no ground to
expect that your people will become more numerous than those of the
neighboring kingdoms.

"If the seasons of husbandry be not interfered with, the grain will be
more than can be eaten. If close nets are not allowed to enter the pools
and ponds, the fish and turtles will be more than can be consumed. If
the axes and bills enter the hill-forests only at the proper times, the
wood will be more than can be used. When the grain and fish and turtles
are more than can be eaten, and there is more wood than can be used,
this enables the people to nourish their living and do all offices for
their dead, without any feeling against any. But this condition, in
which the people nourish their living, and do all offices to their dead
without having any feeling against any, is the first step in the Royal
way.

"Let mulberry trees be planted about the homesteads with their five
acres, and persons of fifty years will be able to wear silk. In keeping
fowls, pigs, dogs, and swine, let not their time of breeding be
neglected, and persons of seventy years will be able to eat flesh. Let
there not be taken away the time that is proper for the cultivation of
the field allotment of a hundred acres, and the family of several mouths
will not suffer from hunger. Let careful attention be paid to the
teaching in the various schools, with repeated inculcation of the filial
and fraternal duties, and gray-haired men will not be seen upon the
roads, carrying burdens on their backs or on their heads. It has never
been that the ruler of a State where these results were seen, persons of
seventy wearing silk and eating flesh, and the black-haired people
suffering neither from hunger nor cold, did not attain to the Royal
dignity.

"Your dogs and swine eat the food of men, and you do not know to store
up of the abundance. There are people dying from famine on the roads,
and you do not know to issue your stores for their relief. When men die,
you say, 'It is not owing to me; it is owing to the year,' In what does
this differ from stabbing a man and killing him, and then saying, 'It
was not I; it was the weapon'? Let your Majesty cease to lay the blame
on the year and instantly the people, all under the sky, will come to
you."

King Hwuy of Lëang said, "I wish quietly to receive your instructions."
Mencius replied, "Is there any difference between killing a man with a
stick and with a sword?" "There is no difference," was the answer.

Mencius continued, "Is there any difference between doing it with a
sword and with governmental measures?" "There is not," was the answer
again.

Mencius then said, "In your stalls there are fat beasts; in your stables
there are fat horses. But your people have the look of hunger, and in
the fields there are those who have died of famine. This is leading on
beasts to devour men. Beasts devour one another, and men hate them for
doing so. When he who is called the parent of the people conducts his
government so as to be chargeable with leading on beasts to devour men,
where is that parental relation to the people? Chung-ne said, 'Was he
not without posterity who first made wooden images to bury with the
dead?' So he said, because that man made the semblances of men and used
them for that purpose; what shall be thought of him who causes his
people to die of hunger?"

King Hwuy of Lëang said, "There was not in the kingdom a stronger State
than Ts'in, as you, venerable Sir, know. But since it descended to me,
on the east we were defeated by Ts'e, and then my eldest son perished;
on the west we lost seven hundred li of territory to Ts'in; and on the
south we have sustained disgrace at the hands of Ts'oo. I have brought
shame on my departed predecessors, and wish on their account to wipe it
away once for all. What course is to be pursued to accomplish this?"

Mencius replied, "With a territory only a hundred li square it has been
possible to obtain the Royal dignity. If your Majesty will indeed
dispense a benevolent government to the people, being sparing in the use
of punishments and fines, and making the taxes and levies of produce
light, so causing that the fields shall be ploughed deep, and the
weeding well attended to, and that the able-bodied, during their days of
leisure, shall cultivate their filial piety, fraternal duty,
faithfulness, and truth, serving thereby, at home, their fathers and
elder brothers, and, abroad, their elders and superiors, you will then
have a people who can be employed with sticks which they have prepared
to oppose the strong buff-coats and sharp weapons of the troops of Ts'in
and Ts'oo.

"The rulers of those States rob their people of their time, so that they
cannot plough and weed their fields in order to support their parents.
Parents suffer from cold and hunger; elder and younger brothers, wives
and children, are separated and scattered abroad. Those rulers drive
their people into pitfalls or into the water; and your Majesty will go
to punish them. In such a case, who will oppose your Majesty? In
accordance with this is the saying, 'The benevolent has no enemy!' I beg
your Majesty not to doubt what I said."

Mencius had an interview with King Sëang[2] of Lëang. When he came out
he said to some persons, "When I looked at him from a distance, he did
not appear like a ruler; when I drew near to him, I saw nothing
venerable about him. Abruptly he asked me, 'How can the kingdom, all
under the sky, be settled?' I replied, 'It will be settled by being
united under one sway,'

"'Who can so unite it?' he asked.

"I replied, 'He who has no pleasure in killing men can so unite it.'

"'Who can give it to him?' he asked.

"I replied, 'All under heaven will give it to him. Does your Majesty
know the way of the growing grain? During the seventh and eighth months,
when drought prevails, the plants become dry. Then the clouds collect
densely in the heavens, and send down torrents of rain, so that the grain
erects itself as if by a shoot. When it does so, who can keep it back?
Now among those who are shepherds of men throughout the kingdom, there
is not one who does not find pleasure in killing men. If there were one
who did not find pleasure in killing men, all the people under the sky
would be looking towards him with outstretched necks. Such being indeed
the case, the people would go to him as water flows downwards with a
rush, which no one can repress."

King Seuen of Ts'e asked, saying, "May I be informed by you of the
transactions of Hwan of Ts'e and Wan of Ts'in?"

Mencius replied, "There were none of the disciples of Chung-ne who spoke
about the affairs of Hwan and Wan, and therefore they have not been
transmitted to these after-ages; your servant has not heard of them. If
you will have me speak, let it be about the principles of attaining to
the Royal sway."

The king said, "Of what kind must his virtue be who can attain to the
Royal sway?" Mencius said, "If he loves and protects the people, it is
impossible to prevent him from attaining it."

The king said, "Is such an one as poor I competent to love and protect
the people?" "Yes," was the reply. "From what do you know that I am
competent to that?" "I have heard," said Mencius, "from Hoo Heih the
following incident:--'The king,' said he, 'was sitting aloft in the
hall, when some people appeared leading a bull past below it. The king
saw it, and asked where the bull was going, and being answered that they
were going to consecrate a bell with its blood, he said, "Let it go, I
cannot bear its frightened appearance--as if it were an innocent person
going to the place of death." They asked in reply whether, if they did
so, they should omit the consecration of the bell, but the king said,
"How can that be omitted? Change it for a sheep."' I do not know whether
this incident occurred."

"It did," said the king, and Mencius replied, "The heart seen in this is
sufficient to carry you to the Royal sway. The people all supposed that
your Majesty grudged the animal, but your servant knows surely that it
was your Majesty's not being able to bear the sight of the creature's
distress which made you do as you did."

The king said, "You are right; and yet there really was an appearance of
what the people imagined. But though Ts'e be narrow and small, how
should I grudge a bull? Indeed it was because I could not bear its
frightened appearance, as if it were an innocent person going to the
place of death, that therefore I changed it for a sheep."

Mencius said, "Let not your Majesty deem it strange that the people
should think you grudged the animal. When you changed a large one for a
small, how should they know the true reason? If you felt pained by its
being led without any guilt to the place of death, what was there to
choose between a bull and a sheep?" The king laughed and said, "What
really was my mind in the matter? I did not grudge the value of the
bull, and yet I changed it for a sheep! There was reason in the people's
saying that I grudged the creature."

Mencius said, "There is no harm in their saying so. It was an artifice
of benevolence. You saw the bull, and had not seen the sheep. So is the
superior man affected towards animals, that, having seen them alive, he
cannot bear to see them die, and, having heard their dying cries, he
cannot bear to eat their flesh. On this account he keeps away from his
stalls and kitchen."

The king was pleased and said, "The Ode says,

  'What other men have in their minds,
  I can measure by reflection,'

This might be spoken of you, my Master. I indeed did the thing, but when
I turned my thoughts inward and sought for it, I could not discover my
own mind. When you, Master, spoke those words, the movements of
compassion began to work in my mind. But how is it that this heart has
in it what is equal to the attainment of the Royal sway?"

Mencius said, "Suppose a man were to make this statement to your
Majesty, 'My strength is sufficient to lift three thousand catties, but
is not sufficient to lift one feather; my eyesight is sharp enough to
examine the point of an autumn hair, but I do not see a wagon-load of
fagots,' would your Majesty allow what he said?" "No," was the king's
remark, and Mencius proceeded, "Now here is kindness sufficient to reach
to animals, and yet no benefits are extended from it to the people--how
is this? is an exception to be made here? The truth is, the feather's
not being lifted is because the strength was not used; the wagon-load of
firewood's not being seen is because the eyesight was not used; and the
people's not being loved and protected is because the kindness is not
used. Therefore your Majesty's not attaining to the Royal sway is
because you do not do it, and not because you are not able to do it."

The king asked, "How may the difference between him who does not do a
thing and him who is not able to do it be graphically set forth?"
Mencius replied, "In such a thing as taking the T'ae mountain under your
arm, and leaping with it over the North Sea, if you say to people, 'I am
not able to do it,' that is a real case of not being able. In such a
matter as breaking off a branch from a tree at the order of a superior,
if you say to people, 'I am not able to do it,' it is not a case of not
being able to do it. And so your Majesty's not attaining to the Royal
sway is not such a case as that of taking the T'ae mountain under your
arm and leaping over the North Sea with it; but it is a case like that
of breaking off a branch from a tree.

"Treat with reverence due to age the elders in your own family, so that
those in the families of others shall be similarly treated; treat with
the kindness due to youth the young in your own family, so that those in
the families of others shall be similarly treated--do this and the
kingdom may be made to go round in your palm. It is said in the 'Book of
Poetry,'

  'His example acted on his wife,
  Extended to his brethren,
  And was felt by all the clans and States;'

Telling us how King Wan simply took this kindly heart, and exercised it
towards those parties. Therefore the carrying out of the feeling of
kindness by a ruler will suffice for the love and protection of all
within the four seas; and if he do not carry it out, he will not be able
to protect his wife and children. The way in which the ancients came
greatly to surpass other men was no other than this, that they carried
out well what they did, so as to affect others. Now your kindness is
sufficient to reach to animals, and yet no benefits are extended from it
to the people. How is this? Is an exception to be made here?

"By weighing we know what things are light, and what heavy. By measuring
we know what things are long, and what short. All things are so dealt
with, and the mind requires specially to be so. I beg your Majesty to
measure it.--Your Majesty collects your equipments of war, endangers
your soldiers and officers and excites the resentment of the various
princes--do these things cause you pleasure in your mind?"

The king said, "No. How should I derive pleasure from these things? My
object in them is to seek for what I greatly desire."

Mencius said, "May I hear from you what it is that your Majesty greatly
desires?" The king laughed, and did not speak. Mencius resumed, "Are you
led to desire it because you have not enough of rich and sweet food for
your mouth? or because you have not enough of light and warm clothing
for your body? or because you have not enough of beautifully colored
objects to satisfy your eyes? or because there are not voices and sounds
enough to fill your ears? or because you have not enough of attendants
and favorites to stand before you and receive your orders? Your
Majesty's various officers are sufficient to supply you with all these
things. How can your Majesty have such a desire on account of them?"
"No," said the king, "my desire is not on account of them." Mencius
observed, "Then what your Majesty greatly desires can be known. You
desire to enlarge your territories, to have Ts'in and Ts'oo coming to
your court, to rule the Middle States, and to attract to you the
barbarous tribes that surround them. But to do what you do in order to
seek for what you desire is like climbing a tree to seek for fish."

"Is it so bad as that?" said the king. "I apprehend it is worse," was
the reply. "If you climb a tree to seek for fish, although you do not
get the fish, you have no subsequent calamity. But if you do what you do
in order to seek for what you desire, doing it even with all your heart,
you will assuredly afterwards meet with calamities." The king said, "May
I hear what they will be?" Mencius replied, "If the people of Tsow were
fighting with the people of Ts'oo, which of them does your Majesty think
would conquer?" "The people of Ts'oo would conquer," was the answer, and
Mencius pursued, "So then, a small State cannot contend with a great,
few cannot contend with many, nor can the weak contend with the strong.
The territory within the seas would embrace nine divisions, each of a
thousand li square. All Ts'e together is one of them. If with one part
you try to subdue the other eight, what is the difference between that
and Tsow's contending with Ts'oo? With the desire which you have, you
must turn back to the proper course for its attainment.

"Now, if your Majesty will institute a government whose action shall all
be benevolent, this will cause all the officers in the kingdom to wish
to stand in your Majesty's court, the farmers all to wish to plough in
your Majesty's fields, the merchants, both travelling and stationary,
all to wish to store their goods in your Majesty's market-places,
travellers and visitors all to wish to travel on your Majesty's roads,
and all under heaven who feel aggrieved by their rulers to wish to come
and complain to your Majesty. When they are so bent, who will be able to
keep them back?"

The king said, "I am stupid and cannot advance to this. But I wish you,
my Master, to assist my intentions. Teach me clearly, and although I am
deficient in intelligence and vigor, I should like to try at least to
institute such a government."

Mencius replied, "They are only men of education, who, without a certain
livelihood, are able to maintain a fixed heart. As to the people, if
they have not a certain livelihood, they will be found not to have a
fixed heart. And if they have not a fixed heart, there is nothing which
they will not do in the way of self-abandonment, of moral deflection, of
depravity, and of wild license. When they have thus been involved in
crime, to follow them up and punish them, is to entrap the people. How
can such a thing as entrapping the people be done under the rule of a
benevolent man?"

"Therefore, an intelligent ruler will regulate the livelihood of the
people, so as to make sure that, above, they shall have sufficient
wherewith to serve their parents, and below, sufficient wherewith to
support their wives and children; that in good years they shall always
be abundantly satisfied, and that in bad years they shall not be in
danger of perishing. After this he may urge them, and they will proceed
to what is good, for in this case the people will follow after that with
readiness.

"But now the livelihood of the people is so regulated, that, above, they
have not sufficient wherewith to serve their parents, and, below, they
have not sufficient wherewith to support their wives and children; even
in good years their lives are always embittered, and in bad years they
are in danger of perishing. In such circumstances their only object is
to escape from death, and they are afraid they will not succeed in doing
so--what leisure have they to cultivate propriety and righteousness?

"If your Majesty wishes to carry out a benevolent government, why not
turn back to what is the essential step to its attainment?

"Let mulberry trees be planted about the homesteads with their five
acres, and persons of fifty years will be able to wear silk. In keeping
fowls, pigs, dogs, and swine, let not their times of breeding be
neglected, and persons of seventy years will be able to eat flesh. Let
there not be taken away the time that is proper for the cultivation of
the field-allotment of a hundred acres, and the family of eight mouths
will not suffer from hunger. Let careful attention be paid to the
teaching in the various schools, with repeated inculcation of the filial
and fraternal duties, and gray-haired men will not be seen upon the
roads, carrying burdens on their backs or on their heads. It has never
been that the ruler of a State, where these results were seen, the old
wearing silk and eating flesh, and the black-haired people suffering
neither from hunger nor cold, did not attain to the Royal dignity."

[NOTE: _Books II, III, and IV are omitted_]


[Footnote 1: The title of this book in Chinese is--"King Hwuy of Lëang;
in chapters and sentences." Like the Books of the Confucian Analects,
those of this work are headed by two or three words at or near the
commencement of them. Each Book is divided into two parts. This
arrangement was made by Chaou K'e, and to him are due also the divisions
into chapters, and sentences, or paragraphs, containing, it may be, many
sentences.]

[Footnote 2: Sëang was the son of King Hwuy. The first year of his reign
is supposed to be B.C. 317. Sëang's name was Hih. As a posthumous
epithet, Sëang has various meanings: "Land-enlarger and Virtuous";
"Successful in Arms." The interview here recorded seems to have taken
place immediately after Hih's accession, and Mencius, it is said, was so
disappointed by it that he soon after left the country.]




THE SHI-KING


[_Metrical translation by James Legge_]



INTRODUCTION


The wisdom of Confucius as a social reformer, as a teacher and guide of
the Chinese people, is shown in many ways. He not only gave them a code
of personal deportment, providing them with rules for the etiquette and
ceremony of life, but he instilled into them that profound spirit of
domestic piety which is one of the strongest features in the Chinese
character. He took measures to secure also the intellectual cultivation
of his followers, and his Five Canons contain all the most ancient works
of Chinese literature, in the departments of poetry, history,
philosophy, and legislation. The Shi-King is a collection of Chinese
poetry made by Confucius himself. This great anthology consists of more
than three hundred pieces, covering the whole range of Chinese lyric
poetry, the oldest of which dates some eighteen centuries before Christ,
while the latest of the selections must have been written at the
beginning of the sixth century before Christ. These poems are of the
highest interest, and even nowadays may be read with delight by
Europeans. The ballad and the hymn are among the earliest forms of
national poetry, and the contents of the Shi-King naturally show
specimens of lyric poetry of this sort. We find there not only hymns,
but also ballads of a really fine and spirited character. Sometimes the
poems celebrate the common pursuits, occupations, and incidents of life.
They rise to the exaltation of the epithalamium, or of the vintage song;
at other times they deal with sentiment and human conduct, being in the
highest degree sententious and epigrammatic. We must give the credit to
Confucius of having saved for us the literature of China, and of having
set his people an example in preserving the monuments of a remote
antiquity. While the literatures of ancient Greece and Rome have largely
perished in the convulsions that followed the breaking up of the Roman
empire in Europe, when the kingdom of China fell into disorder and
decrepitude this one great teacher stepped forward to save the precious
record of historic fact, philosophical thought, and of legislation as
well as poetry, from being swept away by the deluge of revolution.
Confucius showed his wisdom by the high value he set upon the poetry of
his native land, and his name must be set side by side with that of the
astute tyrant of Athens who collected the poems of Homer and preserved
them as a precious heritage to the Greek world. Confucius has given us
his opinion with regard to the poems of the Shi-King. No man, he says,
is worth speaking to who has not mastered the poems of an anthology, the
perusal of which elevates the mind and purifies it from all corrupt
thoughts. Thanks to the work of modern scholarship, English readers can
now verify this dictum for themselves.

E. W.




THE SHI-KING



_PART I--LESSONS FROM THE STATES_


BOOK I

THE ODES OF CHOW AND THE SOUTH


~Celebrating the Virtue of King Wan's Bride~


  Hark! from the islet in the stream the voice
  Of the fish-hawks that o'er their nests rejoice!
  From them our thoughts to that young lady go,
  Modest and virtuous, loth herself to show.
  Where could be found to share our prince's state,
  So fair, so virtuous, and so fit a mate?

  See how the duckweed's stalks, or short or long,
  Sway left and right, as moves the current strong!
  So hard it was for him the maid to find!
  By day, by night, our prince with constant mind
  Sought for her long, but all his search was vain.
  Awake, asleep, he ever felt the pain
  Of longing thought, as when on restless bed,
  Tossing about, one turns his fevered head.

  Here long, there short, afloat the duckweed lies;
  But caught at last, we seize the longed-for prize.
  The maiden modest, virtuous, coy, is found;
  Strike every lute, and joyous welcome sound.
  Ours now, the duckweed from the stream we bear,
  And cook to use with other viands rare.
  He has the maiden, modest, virtuous, bright;
  Let bells and drums proclaim our great delight



~Celebrating the Industry of King Wan's Queen~

  Sweet was the scene. The spreading dolichos
  Extended far, down to the valley's depths,
  With leaves luxuriant. The orioles
  Fluttered around, and on the bushy trees
  In throngs collected--whence their pleasant notes
  Resounded far in richest melody.

  The spreading dolichos extended far,
  Covering the valley's sides, down to its depths,
  With leaves luxuriant and dense. I cut
  It down, then boiled, and from the fibres spun
  Of cloth, both fine and coarse, large store,
  To wear, unwearied of such simple dress.

  Now back to my old home, my parents dear
  To see, I go. The matron I have told,
  Who will announcement make. Meanwhile my clothes,
  My private clothes I wash, and rinse my robes.
  Which of them need be rinsed? and which need not?
  My parents dear to visit, back I go.



~In Praise of a Bride~

  Graceful and young the peach-tree stands;
    How rich its flowers, all gleaming bright!
  This bride to her new home repairs;
    Chamber and house she'll order right.

  Graceful and young the peach-tree stands;
    Large crops of fruit it soon will show.
  This bride to her new home repairs;
    Chamber and house her sway shall know.

  Graceful and young the peach-tree stands,
    Its foliage clustering green and full.
  This bride to her new home repairs;
    Her household will attest her rule.



~Celebrating T'ae-Sze's Freedom from Jealousy~

  In the South are the trees whose branches are bent,
  And droop in such fashion that o'er their extent
    All the dolichos' creepers fast cling.
  See our princely lady, from whom we have got
  Rejoicing that's endless! May her happy lot
    And her honors repose ever bring!

  In the South are the trees whose branches are bent,
  And droop in such fashion that o'er their extent
    All the dolichos' creepers are spread.
  See our princely lady, from whom we have got
  Rejoicing that's endless! Of her happy lot
    And her honors the greatness ne'er fade!

  In the South are the trees whose branches are bent,
  And droop in such fashion that o'er their extent
    All the dolichos' creepers entwine.
  See our princely lady, from whom we have got
  Rejoicing that's endless! May her happy lot
    And her honors complete ever shine!



~The Fruitfulness of the Locust~

  Ye locusts, wingcd tribes,
    Gather in concord fine;
  Well your descendants may
    In numerous bright hosts shine!

  Ye locusts, wingcd tribes,
    Your wings in flight resound;
  Well your descendants may
    In endless lines be found!

  Ye locusts, wingcd tribes,
    Together cluster strong;
  Well your descendants may
    In swarms forever throng!



~Lamenting the Absence of a Cherished Friend~

  Though small my basket, all my toil
    Filled it with mouse-ears but in part.
  I set it on the path, and sighed
    For the dear master of my heart.

  My steeds, o'er-tasked, their progress stayed,
    When midway up that rocky height.
  Give me a cup from that gilt vase--
    When shall this longing end in sight?

  To mount that lofty ridge I drove,
    Until my steeds all changed their hue.
  A cup from that rhinoceros's horn
    May help my longing to subdue.

  Striving to reach that flat-topped hill,
    My steeds, worn out, relaxed their strain;
  My driver also sank oppressed:--
    I'll never see my lord again!



~Celebrating the Goodness of the Descendants of King Wan~

  As the feet of the _lin_, which avoid each living thing,
  So our prince's noble sons no harm to men will bring.
                   They are the _lin!_

  As the front of the _lin_, never forward thrust in wrath,
  So our prince's noble grandsons of love tread the path.
                   They are the _lin!_

  As the horn of the _lin_, flesh-tipped, no wound to give,
  So our prince's noble kindred kindly with all live.
                   They are the _lin!_

[NOTE.--The "lin" is the female of "K'e"--a fabulous animal--the
symbol of all goodness and benevolence; having the body of a
deer, the tail of an ox, the hoofs of a horse, one horn, the scales of a
fish, etc. Its feet do not tread on any living thing--not even on live
grass; it does not butt with its forehead; and the end of its horn is
covered with flesh--to show that, while able for war, it wills to have
peace. The "lin" was supposed to appear inaugurating a golden age,
but the poet finds a better auspice of that in the character of Wan's
family and kindred.]



~The Virtuous Manners of the Young Women~

  High and compressed, the Southern trees
    No shelter from the sun afford.
  The girls free ramble by the Han,
    But will not hear enticing word.
  Like the broad Han are they,
    Through which one cannot dive;
  And like the Keang's long stream,
    Wherewith no raft can strive.

  Many the fagots bound and piled;
    The thorns I'd hew still more to make.
  As brides, those girls their new homes seek;
    Their colts to feed I'd undertake.
  Like the broad Han are they,
    Through which one cannot dive;
  And like the Keang's long stream,
    Wherewith no raft can strive.

  Many the fagots bound and piled;
    The Southern-wood I'd cut for more.
  As brides, those girls their new homes seek;
    Food for their colts I'd bring large store.
  Like the broad Han are they,
    Through which one cannot dive;
  And like the Keang's long stream,
    Wherewith no raft can strive.



~Praise of a Rabbit-Catcher~

  Careful he sets his rabbit-nets all round;
 _Chang-chang_ his blows upon the pegs resound.
  Stalwart the man and bold! his bearing all
  Shows he might be his prince's shield and wall.

  Careful he is his rabbit-nets to place
  Where many paths of rabbits' feet bear trace.
  Stalwart the man and bold! 'tis plain to see
  He to his prince companion good would be.

  Careful he is his rabbit-nets to spread,
  Where in the forest's depth the trees give shade.
  Stalwart the man and bold! fit his the part
  Guide to his prince to be, and faithful heart.



~The Song of the Plantain-Gatherers~

  We gather and gather the plantains;
    Come gather them anyhow.
  Yes, gather and gather the plantains,
    And here we have got them now.

  We gather and gather the plantains;
    Now off the ears we must tear.
  Yes, gather and gather the plantains,
    And now the seeds are laid bare.

  We gather and gather the plantains,
    The seeds in our skirts are placed.
  Yes, gather and gather the plantains.
    Ho! safe in the girdled waist!



~The Affection of the Wives on the Joo~

  Along the raised banks of the Joo,
    To hew slim stem and branch I wrought,
  My lord away, my husband true,
    Like hunger-pang my troubled thought!

  Along the raised banks of the Joo,
    Branch and fresh shoot confessed my art.
  I've seen my lord, my husband true,
    And still he folds me in his heart.

  As the toiled bream makes red its tail,
    Toil you, Sir, for the Royal House;
  Amidst its blazing fires, nor quail:--
    Your parents see you pay your vows.




BOOK II



THE ODES OF SHAOU AND THE SOUTH



~The Marriage of a Princess~

    In the magpie's nest
    Dwells the dove at rest.
  This young bride goes to her future home;
  To meet her a hundred chariots come.

    Of the magpie's nest
    Is the dove possessed.
  This bride goes to her new home to live;
  And escort a hundred chariots give.

    The nest magpie wove
    Now filled by the dove.
  This bride now takes to her home her way;
  And these numerous cars her state display.



~The Industry and Reverence of a Prince's Wife~

  Around the pools, the islets o'er,
    Fast she plucks white Southern-wood,
  To help the sacrificial store;
    And for our prince does service good.

  Where streams among the valleys shine,
    Of Southern-woods she plucks the white;
  And brings it to the sacred shrine,
    To aid our prince in solemn rite.

  In head-dress high, most reverent, she
    The temple seeks at early dawn.
  The service o'er, the head-dress see
    To her own chamber slow withdrawn.



~The Wife of Some Great Officer Bewails His Absence~

  Shrill chirp the insects in the grass;
    All about the hoppers spring.
  While I my husband do not see,
    Sorrow must my bosom wring.
      O to meet him!
      O to greet him!
    Then my heart would rest and sing.

  Ascending high that Southern hill,
    Turtle ferns I strove to get.
  While I my husband do not see,
    Sorrow must my heart beset.
      O to meet him!
      O to greet him!
    Then my heart would cease to fret.

  Ascending high that Southern hill,
    Spinous ferns I sought to find.
  While I my husband do not see,
    Rankles sorrow in my mind.
      O to meet him!
      O to greet him!
    In my heart would peace be shrined.



~The Diligence of the Young Wife of an Officer~

  She gathers fast the large duckweed,
    From valley stream that southward flows;
  And for the pondweed to the pools
    Left on the plains by floods she goes.

  The plants, when closed her toil, she puts
    In baskets round and baskets square.
  Then home she hies to cook her spoil,
    In pans and tripods ready there.

  In sacred chamber this she sets,
    Where the light falls down through the wall.
  'Tis she, our lord's young reverent wife,
    Who manages this service all.



~The Love of the People for the Duke of Shaou~

  O fell not that sweet pear-tree!
    See how its branches spread.
      Spoil not its shade,
      For Shaou's chief laid
    Beneath it his weary head.

  O clip not that sweet pear-tree!
    Each twig and leaflet spare.
      'Tis sacred now,
      Since the lord of Shaou,
    When weary, rested him there.

  O touch not that sweet pear-tree!
    Bend not a twig of it now.
      There long ago,
      As the stories show,
    Oft halted the chief of Shaou.



~The Easy Dignity of the Officers at Some Court~

  Arrayed in skins of lamb or sheep,
    With five silk braidings all of white,
  From court they go, to take their meal,
    All self-possessed, with spirits light.

  How on their skins of lamb or sheep
    The five seams wrought with white silk show!
  With easy steps, and self-possessed,
    From court to take their meal, they go.

  Upon their skins of lamb or sheep
    Shines the white silk the seams to link.
  With easy steps and self-possessed,
    They go from court to eat and drink.



~Anxiety of a Young Lady to Get Married~

  Ripe, the plums fall from the bough;
  Only seven-tenths left there now!
  Ye whose hearts on me are set,
  Now the time is fortunate!

  Ripe, the plums fall from the bough;
  Only three-tenths left there now!
  Ye who wish my love to gain,
  Will not now apply in vain!

  No more plums upon the bough!
  All are in my basket now!
  Ye who me with ardor seek,
  Need the word but freely speak!



BOOK III



THE ODES OF P'EI


~An Officer Bewails the Neglect with which He is Treated~

  It floats about, that boat of cypress wood,
    Now here, now there, as by the current borne.
  Nor rest nor sleep comes in my troubled mood;
    I suffer as when painful wound has torn
    The shrinking body. Thus I dwell forlorn,
  And aimless muse, my thoughts of sorrow full.
    I might with wine refresh my spirit worn;
  I might go forth, and, sauntering try to cool
  The fever of my heart; but grief holds sullen rule.

  My mind resembles not a mirror plate,
    Reflecting all the impressions it receives.
  The good I love, the bad regard with hate;
    I only cherish whom my heart believes.
    Colleagues I have, but yet my spirit grieves,
  That on their honor I cannot depend.
    I speak, but my complaint no influence leaves
  Upon their hearts; with mine no feelings blend;
  With me in anger they, and fierce disdain contend.

  My mind is fixed, and cannot, like a stone,
    Be turned at will indifferently about;
  And what I think, to that, and that alone,
    I utterance give, alike within, without;
    Nor can like mat be rolled and carried out.
  With dignity in presence of them all,
    My conduct marked, my goodness who shall scout?
  My foes I boldly challenge, great and small,
  If there be aught in me they can in question call.

  How full of trouble is my anxious heart!
    With hate the blatant herd of creatures mean
  Ceaseless pursue. Of their attacks the smart
    Keeps my mind in distress. Their venomed spleen
    Aye vents itself; and with insulting mien
  They vex my soul; and no one on my side
    A word will speak. Silent, alone, unseen,
  I think of my sad case; then opening wide
  My eyes, as if from sleep, I beat my breast, sore-tried.

  Thy disc, O sun, should ever be complete,
    While thine, O changing moon, doth wax and wane.
  But now our sun hath waned, weak and effete,
    And moons are ever full. My heart with pain
    Is firmly bound, and held in sorrow's chain,
  As to the body cleaves an unwashed dress.
    Silent I think of my sad case; in vain
  I try to find relief from my distress.
  Would I had wings to fly where ills no longer press!



~A Wife Deplores the Absence of Her Husband~


  Away the startled pheasant flies,
    With lazy movement of his wings.
  Borne was my heart's lord from my eyes;--
    What pain the separation brings!

  The pheasant, though no more in view,
    His cry, below, above, forth sends.
  Alas! my princely lord, 'tis you--
    Your absence, that my bosom rends.

  At sun and moon I sit and gaze,
    In converse with my troubled heart.
  Far, far from me my husband stays!
    When will he come to heal its smart?

  Ye princely men who with him mate,
    Say, mark ye not his virtuous way.
  His rule is--covet nought, none hate;--
    How can his steps from goodness stray?



~The Plaint of a Rejected Wife~

  The east wind gently blows,
    With cloudy skies and rain.
  'Twixt man and wife should ne'er be strife,
    But harmony obtain.
  Radish and mustard plants
    Are used, though some be poor;
  While my good name is free from blame,
    Don't thrust me from your door.

  I go along the road,
    Slow, with reluctant heart.
  Your escort lame to door but came,
    There glad from me to part.
  Sow-thistle, bitter called,
    As shepherd's purse is sweet;
  With your new mate you feast elate,
    As joyous brothers meet.

  Part clear, the stream of King
    Is foul beside the Wei.
  You feast elate with your new mate,
    And take no heed of me.
  Loose mate, avoid my dam,
    Nor dare my basket move!
  Person slighted, life all blighted,
    What can the future prove?

  The water deep, in boat,
    Or raft-sustained, I'd go;
  And where the stream did narrow seem,
    I dived or breasted through.
  I labored to increase
    Our means, or great or small;
  When 'mong friends near death did appear,
    On knees to help I'd crawl.

  No cherishing you give,
    I'm hostile in your eyes.
  As pedler's wares for which none cares,
    My virtues you despise.

  When poverty was nigh,
   I strove our means to spare;
  You, now rich grown, me scorn to own;
   To poison me compare.

  The stores for winter piled
   Are all unprized in spring.
  So now, elate with your new mate,
   Myself away you fling.
  Your cool disdain for me
   A bitter anguish hath.
  The early time, our love's sweet prime,
   In you wakes only wrath.



~Soldiers of Wei Bewail Separation from Their Families~

  List to the thunder and roll of the drum!
    See how we spring and brandish the dart!
  Some raise Ts'aou's walls; some do field work at home;
    But we to the southward lonely depart.

  Our chief, Sun Tsze-chung, agreement has made,
    Our forces to join with Ch'in and with Sung.
  When shall we back from this service be led?
    Our hearts are all sad, our courage unstrung.

  Here we are halting, and there we delay;
    Anon we soon lose our high-mettled steeds.
  The forest's gloom makes our steps go astray;
    Each thicket of trees our searching misleads.

  For death as for life, at home or abroad,
    We pledged to our wives our faithfulest word.
  Their hands clasped in ours, together we vowed,
    We'd live to old age in sweetest accord.

  This march to the South can end but in ill;
    Oh! never shall we our wives again meet.
  The word that we pledged we cannot fulfil;
    Us home returning they never will greet.



~An Officer Tells of His Mean Employment~

  With mind indifferent, things I easy take;
  In every dance I prompt appearance make:--
  Then, when the sun is at his topmost height,
  There, in the place that courts the public sight.

  With figure large I in the courtyard dance,
  And the duke smiles, when he beholds me prance.
  A tiger's strength I have; the steeds swift bound;
  The reins as ribbons in my hands are found.

  See how I hold the flute in my left hand;
  In right the pheasant's plume, waved like a wand;
  With visage red, where rouge you think to trace,
  While the duke pleased, sends down the cup of grace!

  Hazel on hills; the _ling_ in meadow damp;--
  Each has its place, while I'm a slighted scamp.
  My thoughts go back to th' early days of Chow,
  And muse upon its chiefs, not equalled now.
    O noble chiefs, who then the West adorned,
    Would ye have thus neglected me and scorned?



~An Officer Sets Forth His Hard Lot~

  My way leads forth by the gate on the north;
    My heart is full of woe.
  I hav'n't a cent, begged, stolen, or lent,
    And friends forget me so.
     So let it be! 'tis Heaven's decree.
     What can I say--a poor fellow like me?

  The King has his throne, sans sorrow or moan;
    On me fall all his cares,
  And when I come home, resolved not to roam,
    Each one indignant stares.
     So let it be! 'tis Heaven's decree.
     What can I say--a poor fellow like me?

  Each thing of the King, and the fate of the State,
    On me come more and more.
  And when, sad and worn, I come back forlorn,
    They thrust me from the door.
      So let it be! 'tis Heaven's decree.
      What can I say--a poor fellow like me?



~The Complaint of a Neglected Wife~

  When the upper robe is green,
  With a yellow lining seen,
  There we have a certain token,
  Right is wronged and order broken.
  How can sorrow from my heart
  In a case like this depart?

  Color green the robe displays;
  Lower garment yellow's blaze.
  Thus it is that favorite mean
  In the place of wife is seen.
  Vain the conflict with my grief;
  Memory denies relief.

  Yes, 'twas you the green who dyed,
  You who fed the favorite's pride.
  Anger rises in my heart,
  Pierces it as with a dart.
  But on ancient rules lean I,
  Lest to wrong my thoughts should fly.

  Fine or coarse, if thin the dress,
  Cold winds always cause distress.
  Hard my lot, my sorrow deep,
  But my thoughts in check I keep.
  Ancient story brings to mind
  Sufferers who were resigned.


[NOTE.--Yellow is one of the five "correct" colors of the Chinese, while
green is one of the "intermediate" colors that are less esteemed. Here
we have the yellow used merely as a lining to the green, or employed in
the lower, or less honorable, part of the dress;--an inversion of
propriety, and intimating how a favorite had usurped the place of the
rightful wife and thrust her down.]



~In Praise of a Maiden~


  O sweet maiden, so fair and retiring,
    At the corner I'm waiting for you;
  And I'm scratching my head, and inquiring
    What on earth it were best I should do.

  Oh! the maiden, so handsome and coy,
    For a pledge gave a slim rosy reed.
  Than the reed is she brighter, my joy;
    On her loveliness how my thoughts feed!

  In the pastures a _t'e_ blade she sought,
    And she gave it, so elegant, rare.
  Oh! the grass does not dwell in my thought,
    But the donor, more elegant, fair.



~Discontent~

  As when the north winds keenly blow,
  And all around fast falls the snow,
  The source of pain and suffering great,
  So now it is in Wei's poor state.
  Let us join hands and haste away,
    My friends and lovers all.
  'Tis not a time will brook delay;
    Things for prompt action call.

  As when the north winds whistle shrill,
  And drifting snows each hollow fill,
  The source of pain and suffering great,
  So now it is in Wei's poor state,
  Let us join hands, and leave for aye,
    My friends and lovers all,
  'Tis not a time will brook delay;
    Things for prompt action call.

  We look for red, and foxes meet;
  For black, and crows our vision greet.
  The creatures, both of omen bad,
  Well suit the state of Wei so sad.

  Let us join hands and mount our cars,
    My friends and lovers all.
  No time remains for wordy jars;
    Things for prompt action call.



~Chwang Keang Bemoans Her Husband's Cruelty~

  Fierce is the wind and cold;
    And such is he.
  Smiling he looks, and bold
    Speaks mockingly.
  Scornful and lewd his words,
    Haughty his smile.
  Bound is my heart with cords
    In sorrow's coil.

  As cloud of dust wind-blown,
    Just such is he.
  Ready he seems to own,
    And come to me.
  But he comes not nor goes,
    Stands in his pride.
  Long, long, with painful throes,
    Grieved I abide.

  Strong blew the wind; the cloud
    Hastened away.
  Soon dark again, the shroud
    Covers the day.
  I wake, and sleep no more
    Visits my eyes.
  His course I sad deplore,
    With heavy sighs.

  Cloudy the sky, and dark;
    The thunders roll.
  Such outward signs well mark
    My troubled soul.
  I wake, and sleep no more
    Comes to give rest.
  His course I sad deplore,
    In anguished breast.



[NOTE: Selections from Books IV., V., and VI.,
have been omitted.--EDITOR.]



BOOK VII



THE ODES OF CH'ING



~The People's Admiration for Duke Woo~

  The black robes well your form befit;
    When they are worn we'll make you new.
  Now for your court! oh! there we'll sit,
    And watch how you your duties do.
      And when we to our homes repair,
      We'll send to you our richest fare,
      Such is the love to you we bear!

  Those robes well with your virtue match;
    When they are worn we'll make you new.
  Now for your court! There will we watch,
    Well pleased, how you your duties do.
      And when we to our homes repair,
      We'll send to you our richest fare,
      Such is the love to you we bear!

  Those robes your character beseem;
    When they are worn we'll make you new.
  Now for your court! oh! there we deem
    It pleasure great your form to view.
      And when we to our homes repair,
      We'll send to you our richest fare,
      Such is the love to you we bear!



~A Wife Consoled by Her Husband's Arrival~

  Cold is the wind, fast falls the rain,
    The cock aye shrilly crows.
  But I have seen my lord again;--
    Now must my heart repose.

  Whistles the wind, patters the rain,
    The cock's crow far resounds.
  But I have seen my lord again,
    And healed are my heart's wounds.

  All's dark amid the wind and rain,
    Ceaseless the cock's clear voice!
  But I have seen my lord again;--
    Should not my heart rejoice?


~In Praise of Some Lady~

  There by his side in chariot rideth she,
  As lovely flower of the hibiscus tree,
  So fair her face; and when about they wheel,
  Her girdle gems of _Ken_ themselves reveal.
  For beauty all the House of Këang have fame;
  Its eldest daughter--she beseems her name.

  There on the path, close by him, walketh she,
  Bright as the blossom of hibiscus tree,
  And fair her face; and when around they flit,
  Her girdle gems a tinkling sound emit.
  Among the Keang she has distinguished place,
  For virtuous fame renowned, and peerless grace.



~A Man's Praise of His Wife~

  My path forth from the east gate lay,
  Where cloud-like moved the girls at play.
  Numerous are they, as clouds so bright,
  But not on them my heart's thoughts light.
  Dressed in a thin white silk, with coiffure gray
  Is she, my wife, my joy in life's low way.

  Forth by the covering wall's high tower,
  I went, and saw, like rush in flower,
  Each flaunting girl. Brilliant are they,
  But not with them my heart's thoughts stay.
  In thin white silk, with head-dress madder-dyed,
  Is she, my sole delight, 'foretime my bride.



~An Entreaty~

  Along the great highway,
    I hold you by the cuff.
  O spurn me not, I pray,
    Nor break old friendship off.

  Along the highway worn,
    I hold your hand in mine.
  Do not as vile me scorn;
    Your love I can't resign.



  ~A Woman Scorning Her Lover~

  O dear! that artful boy
    Refuses me a word!
  But, Sir, I shall enjoy
    My food, though you're absurd!

  O dear! that artful boy
    My table will not share!
  But, Sir, I shall enjoy
    My rest, though you're not there!



~A Lady Mourns the Absence of Her Student Lover~

  You student, with the collar blue,
    Long pines my heart with anxious pain.
  Although I do not go to you,
    Why from all word do you refrain?

  O you, with girdle strings of blue,
    My thoughts to you forever roam!
  Although I do not go to you,
    Yet why to me should you not come?

  How reckless you, how light and wild,
    There by the tower upon the wall!
  One day, from sight of you exiled,
    As long as three long months I call.


[NOTE: Selections from Books IV., V., and VI., have been
omitted.--EDITOR.]



BOOK VIII



THE ODES OF TS'E



~A Wife Urging Her Husband to Action~

  His lady to the marquis says,
     "The cock has crowed; 'tis late.
  Get up, my lord, and haste to court.
     'Tis full; for you they wait."
  She did not hear the cock's shrill sound,
  Only the blueflies buzzing round.

  Again she wakes him with the words,
     "The east, my lord, is bright.
  A crowded court your presence seeks;
     Get up and hail the light."
  'Twas not the dawning light which shone,
  But that which by the moon was thrown.

  He sleeping still, once more she says,
     "The flies are buzzing loud.
  To lie and dream here by your side
     Were pleasant, but the crowd
  Of officers will soon retire;
  Draw not on you and me their ire!"



~The Folly of Useless Effort~

  The weeds will but the ranker grow,
    If fields too large you seek to till.
  To try to gain men far away
    With grief your toiling heart will fill,

  If fields too large you seek to till,
    The weeds will only rise more strong.
  To try to gain men far away
    Will but your heart's distress prolong.

  Things grow the best when to themselves
    Left, and to nature's vigor rare.
  How young and tender is the child,
    With his twin tufts of falling hair!
  But when you him ere long behold,
    That child shall cap of manhood wear!



~The Prince of Loo~

  A grand man is the prince of Loo,
    With person large and high.
  Lofty his front and suited to
    The fine glance of his eye!
  Swift are his feet. In archery
    What man with him can vie?
  With all these goodly qualities,
    We see him and we sigh!

  Renowned through all the land is he,
    The nephew of our lord.
  With clear and lovely eyes, his grace
    May not be told by word.
  All day at target practice,
    He'll never miss the bird.
  Such is the prince of Loo, and yet
    With grief for him we're stirred!

  All grace and beauty he displays,
    High forehead and eyes bright.
  And dancing choice! His arrows all
    The target hit aright.
  Straight through they go, and every one
    Lights on the self-same spot.
  Rebellion he could well withstand,
    And yet we mourn his lot!



BOOK IX



THE ODES OF WEI



~On the Misgovernment of the State~

  A fruit, small as the garden peach,
    May still be used for food.
  A State, though poor as ours, might thrive,
    If but its rule were good.
  Our rule is bad, our State is sad,
    With mournful heart I grieve.
  All can from instrument and voice
    My mood of mind perceive.
  Who know me not, with scornful thought,
    Deem me a scholar proud.
  "Those men are right," they fiercely say,
    "What mean your words so loud?"
  Deep in my heart my sorrows lie,
    And none the cause may know.
  How should they know who never try
    To learn whence comes our woe?

  The garden jujube, although small,
    May still be used for food.
  A State, though poor as ours, might thrive,
    If but its rule were good.
  Our rule is bad, our State is sad,
    With mournful heart I grieve.
  Methinks I'll wander through the land,
    My misery to relieve.
  Who know me not, with scornful thought,
    Deem that wild views I hold.
  "Those men are right," they fiercely say,
    "What mean your words so bold?"

  Deep in my heart my sorrows lie,
  And none the cause may know.
  How can they know, who never try
  To learn whence comes our woe?



~The Mean Husband~

  Thin cloth of dolichos supplies the shoes,
    In which some have to brave the frost and cold.
  A bride, when poor, her tender hands must use,
    Her dress to make, and the sharp needle hold.
  This man is wealthy, yet he makes his bride
    Collars and waistbands for his robes provide.

  Conscious of wealth, he moves with easy mien;
    Politely on the left he takes his place;
  The ivory pin is at his girdle seen:--
    His dress and gait show gentlemanly grace.
  Why do we brand him in our satire here?
    'Tis this---his niggard soul provokes the sneer.



~A Young Soldier on Service~

  To the top of that tree-clad hill I go,
    And towards my father I gaze,
  Till with my mind's eye his form I espy,
    And my mind's ear hears how he says:--
  "Alas for my son on service abroad!
    He rests not from morning till eve.
  May he careful be and come back to me!
    While he is away, how I grieve!"

  To the top of that barren hill I climb,
    And towards my mother I gaze,
  Till with my mind's eye her form I espy,
    And my mind's ear hears how she says:--
  "Alas for my child on service abroad!
    He never in sleep shuts an eye.
  May he careful be, and come back to me!
    In the wild may his body not lie!"

  Up the lofty ridge I, toiling, ascend,
    And towards my brother I gaze,
  Till with my mind's eye his form I espy,
    And my mind's ear hears how he says:--
  "Alas! my young brother, serving abroad,
    All day with his comrades must roam.
  May he careful be, and come back to me,
    And die not away from his home."



BOOK X



THE ODES OF TANG



~The King Goes to War~

  The wild geese fly the bushy oaks around,
  With clamor loud. _Suh-suh_ their wings resound,
  As for their feet poor resting-place is found.
  The King's affairs admit of no delay.
  Our millet still unsown, we haste away.
  No food is left our parents to supply;
  When we are gone, on whom can they rely?
  O azure Heaven, that shinest there afar,
  When shall our homes receive us from the war?

  The wild geese on the bushy jujube-trees
  Attempt to settle and are ill at ease;--
  _Suh-suh_ their wings go flapping in the breeze.
  The King's affairs admit of no delay;
  Our millet still unsown, we haste away.
  How shall our parents their requirements get?
  How in our absence shall their wants be met?
  O azure Heaven, that shinest there afar,
  When shall our homes receive us from the war?

  The bushy mulberry-trees the geese in rows
  Seek eager and to rest around them close--
  With rustling loud, as disappointment grows.
  The King's affairs admit of no delay;
  To plant our rice and maize we cannot stay.
  How shall our parents find their wonted food?
  When we are gone, who will to them be good?
  O azure Heaven, that shinest there afar,
  When shall our homes receive us from the war?



~Lament of a Bereaved Person~


  A russet pear-tree rises all alone,
  But rich the growth of leaves upon it shown!
  I walk alone, without one brother left,
  And thus of natural aid am I bereft.
  Plenty of people there are all around,
  But none like my own father's sons are found.
  Ye travellers, who forever hurry by,
  Why on me turn the unsympathizing eye?
  No brother lives with whom my cause to plead;--
  Why not perform for me the helping deed?

  A russet pear-tree rises all alone,
  But rich with verdant foliage o'ergrown.
  I walk alone, without one brother's care,
  To whom I might, amid my straits repair.
  Plenty of people there are all around,
  But none like those of my own name are found.
  Ye travellers, who forever hurry by,
  Why on me turn the unsympathizing eye?
  No brother lives with whom my cause to plead;--
  Why not perform for me the helping deed?



~The Drawbacks of Poverty~

  On the left of the way, a russet pear-tree
  Stands there all alone--a fit image of me.
  There is that princely man! O that he would come,
  And in my poor dwelling with me be at home!
  In the core of my heart do I love him, but say,
  Whence shall I procure him the wants of the day?

  At the bend in the way a russet pear-tree
  Stands there all alone--a fit image of me.
  There is that princely man! O that he would come,
  And rambling with me be himself here at home!
  In the core of my heart I love him, but say,
  Whence shall I procure him the wants of the day?



~A Wife Mourns for Her Husband~

  The dolichos grows and covers the thorn,
    O'er the waste is the dragon-plant creeping.
  The man of my heart is away and I mourn--
    What home have I, lonely and weeping?

  Covering the jujubes the dolichos grows,
    The graves many dragon-plants cover;
  But where is the man on whose breast I'd repose?
    No home have I, having no lover!

  Fair to see was the pillow of horn,
    And fair the bed-chamber's adorning;
  But the man of my heart is not here, and I mourn
    All alone, and wait for the morning.

  While the long days of summer pass over my head,
    And long winter nights leave their traces,
  I'm alone! Till a hundred of years shall have fled,
    And then I shall meet his embraces.

  Through the long winter nights I am burdened with fears,
    Through the long summer days I am lonely;
  But when time shall have counted its hundreds of years
    I then shall be his--and his only!



BOOK XI



THE ODES OF TS'IN



~Celebrating the Opulence of the Lords of Ts'in~

  Our ruler to the hunt proceeds;
  And black as iron are his steeds
  That heed the charioteer's command,
  Who holds the six reins in his hand.
  His favorites follow to the chase,
  Rejoicing in his special grace.

  The season's males, alarmed, arise--
  The season's males, of wondrous size.
  Driven by the beaters, forth they spring,
  Soon caught within the hunters' ring.
  "Drive on their left," the ruler cries;
  And to its mark his arrow flies.

  The hunting done, northward he goes;
  And in the park the driver shows
  The horses' points, and his own skill
  That rules and guides them at his will.
  Light cars whose teams small bells display,
  The long-and short-mouthed dogs convey.


~A Complaint~

  He lodged us in a spacious house,
    And plenteous was our fare.
  But now at every frugal meal
    There's not a scrap to spare.
  Alas! alas that this good man
  Could not go on as he began!


  ~A Wife's Grief Because of Her Husband's Absence~

  The falcon swiftly seeks the north,
  And forest gloom that sent it forth.
  Since I no more my husband see,
  My heart from grief is never free.
  O how is it, I long to know,
  That he, my lord, forgets me so?

  Bushy oaks on the mountain grow,
  And six elms where the ground is low.
  But I, my husband seen no more,
  My sad and joyless fate deplore.
  O how is it, I long to know,
  That he, my lord, forgets me so?

  The hills the bushy wild plums show,
  And pear-trees grace the ground below.
  But, with my husband from me gone,
  As drunk with grief, I dwell alone.
  O how is it, I long to know,
  That he, my lord, forgets me so?


~Lament for Three Brothers~


  They flit about, the yellow birds,
    And rest upon the jujubes find.
  Who buried were in duke Muh's grave,
    Alive to awful death consigned?

  'Mong brothers three, who met that fate,
    'Twas sad the first, Yen-seih to see.
  He stood alone; a hundred men
    Could show no other such as he.
  When to the yawning grave he came,
  Terror unnerved and shook his frame.

  Why thus destroy our noblest men,
    To thee we cry, O azure Heaven!
  To save Yen-seih from death, we would
    A hundred lives have freely given.

  They flit about, the yellow birds,
    And on the mulberry-trees rest find.
  Who buried were in duke Muh's grave,
    Alive to awful death consigned?

  'Mong brothers three, who met that fate,
    'Twas sad the next, Chung-hang to see.
  When on him pressed a hundred men,
    A match for all of them was he.
  When to the yawning grave he came,
  Terror unnerved and shook his frame.

  Why thus destroy our noblest men,
    To thee we cry, O azure Heaven!
  To save Chung-hang from death, we would
    A hundred lives have freely given.

  They flit about, the yellow birds,
    And rest upon the thorn-trees find.
  Who buried were in duke Muh's grave,
    Alive to awful death consigned?

  'Mong brothers three, who met that fate,
    'Twas sad the third, K'ëen-foo, to see.
  A hundred men in desperate fight
    Successfully withstand could he.
  When to the yawning grave he came,
  Terror unnerved and shook his frame.

  Why thus destroy our noblest men,
    To thee we cry, O azure Heaven!
  To save K'ëen-foo from death, we would
    A hundred lives have freely given.


[NOTE.--The incident related in this poem occurred in the year B.C. 620,
when the duke of Muh died after playing an important part in the affairs
of Northwest China. Muh required the three officers here celebrated, to
be buried with him, and according to the "Historical Records" this
barbarous practice began with duke Ching, Muh's predecessor. In all, 170
individuals were buried with Muh. The death of the last distinguished
man of the Ts'in dynasty, the Emperor I, was subsequently celebrated by
the entombment with him of all the inmates of his harem.]



~In Praise of a Ruler of Ts'in~

  What trees grow on the Chung-nan hill?
    The white fir and the plum.
  In fur of fox, 'neath 'broidered robe,
    Thither our prince is come.
  His face glows with vermilion hue.
  O may he prove a ruler true!

  What find we on the Chung-nan hill?
    Deep nook and open glade.
  Our prince shows there the double _Ke_
    On lower robe displayed.
  His pendant holds each tinkling gem,
  Long life be his, and deathless fame!



~The Generous Nephew~

  I escorted my uncle to Tsin,
    Till the Wei we crossed on the way.
      Then I gave as I left
      For his carriage a gift
  Four steeds, and each steed was a bay.

  I escorted my uncle to Tsin,
    And I thought of him much in my heart.
      Pendent stones, and with them
     Of fine jasper a gem,
  I gave, and then saw him depart.



BOOK XII



THE ODES OF CH'IN



~The Contentment of a Poor Recluse~

My only door some pieces of crossed wood,
  Within it I can rest enjoy.
I drink the water wimpling from the spring;
  Nor hunger can my peace destroy.

Purged from ambition's aims I say, "For fish.
  We need not bream caught in the Ho;
Nor, to possess the sweets of love, require
  To Ts'e, to find a Keang, to go.

"The man contented with his lot, a meal
  Of fish without Ho carp can make;
Nor needs, to rest in his domestic joy,
  A Tsze of Sung as wife to take."



~The Disappointed Lover~

Where grow the willows near the eastern gate,
  And 'neath their leafy shade we could recline,
She said at evening she would me await,
  And brightly now I see the day-star shine!

Here where the willows near the eastern gate
  Grow, and their dense leaves make a shady gloom,
She said at evening she would me await.
  See now the morning star the sky illume!



~A Love-Song~

The moon comes forth, bright in the sky;
A lovelier sight to draw my eye
  Is she, that lady fair.
She round my heart has fixed love's chain,
But all my longings are in vain.
  'Tis hard the grief to bear.

The moon comes forth, a splendid sight;
More winning far that lady bright,
  Object of my desire!
Deep-seated is my anxious grief;
In vain I seek to find relief;
  While glows the secret fire.

The rising moon shines mild and fair;
More bright is she, whose beauty rare
  My heart with longing fills.
With eager wish I pine in vain;
O for relief from constant pain,
  Which through my bosom thrills!



~The Lament of a Lover~

There where its shores the marsh surround,
Rushes and lotus plants abound.
Their loveliness brings to my mind
The lovelier one that I would find.
In vain I try to ease the smart
Of wounded love that wrings my heart.
In waking thought and nightly dreams,
From every pore the water streams.

All round the marsh's shores are seen
Valerian flowers and rushes green.
But lovelier is that Beauty rare,
Handsome and large, and tall and fair,
I wish and long to call her mine,
Doomed with the longing still to pine.
Nor day nor night e'er brings relief;
My inmost heart is full of grief.

Around the marsh, in rich display,
Grow rush and lotus flowers, all gay.
But not with her do they compare,
So tall and large, majestic, fair.
Both day and night, I nothing speed;
Still clings to me the aching need.
On side, on back, on face, I lie,
But vain each change of posture.


THE ODES OF KWEI


~The Wish of an Unhappy Man~

  Where the grounds are wet and low,
  There the trees of goat-peach grow,
  With their branches small and smooth,
  Glossy in their tender youth.
  Joy it were to me, O tree,
  Consciousness to want like thee.

  Where the grounds are wet and low,
  There the trees of goat-peach grow.
  Soft and fragrant are their flowers,
  Glossy from the vernal showers.
  Joy it were to me, O tree,
  Ties of home to want like thee.

  Where the grounds are wet and low,
  There the trees of goat-peach grow,
  What delicious fruits they bear,
  Glossy, soft, of beauty rare!
  Joy it were to me, O tree,
  Household cares to want like thee.



BOOK XIV



THE ODES OF TS'AOU

~Against Frivolous Pursuits~

  Like splendid robes appear the wings
    Of the ephemeral fly;
  And such the pomp of those great men,
    Which soon in death shall lie!
  I grieve! Would they but come to me!
    To teach them I should try.

  The wings of the ephemeral fly
    Are robes of colors gay;
  And such the glory of those men,
    Soon crumbling to decay!
  I grieve! Would they but rest with me,
    They'd learn a better way!

  The ephemeral fly bursts from its hole,
    With gauzy wings like snow;
  So quick the rise, so quick the fall,
    Of those great men we know!
  I grieve! Would they but lodge with me,
    Forth they would wiser go.


BOOK XV



THE ODES OF PIN


~The Duke of Chow Tells of His Soldiers~

  To the hills of the east we went,
    And long had we there to remain.
  When the word of recall was sent,
    Thick and fast came the drizzling rain.
  When told our return we should take,
    Our hearts in the West were and sore;
  But there did they clothes for us make:--
    They knew our hard service was o'er.
  On the mulberry grounds in our sight
    The large caterpillars were creeping;
  Lonely and still we passed the night,
    All under our carriages sleeping.

  To the hills of the East we went,
    And long had we there to remain.
  When the word of recall was sent,
    Thick and fast came the drizzling rain.
  The heavenly gourds rise to the eye,
    With their fruit hanging under the eave.
  In our chambers the sow-bug we spy;
    Their webs on our doors spiders weave.
  Our paddocks seem crowded with deer,
    With the glow-worm's light all about.
  Such thoughts, while they filled us with fear,
    We tried, but in vain, to keep out.

  To the hills of the East we went,
    And long had we there to remain.
  When the word of recall was sent,
    Thick and fast came the drizzling rain.

  On ant-hills screamed cranes with delight;
    In their rooms were our wives sighing sore.
  Our homes they had swept and made tight:--
    All at once we arrived at the door.
  The bitter gourds hanging are seen,
    From branches of chestnut-trees high.
  Three years of toil away we had been,
    Since such a sight greeted the eye.

  To the hills of the East we went,
    And long had we there to remain.
  When the word of recall was sent,
    Thick and fast came the drizzling rain.
  With its wings now here, and now there,
    Is the oriole sporting in flight.
  Those brides to their husbands repair,
    Their steeds red and bay, flecked with white.
  Each mother has fitted each sash;
    Their equipments are full and complete;
  But fresh unions, whatever their dash,
    Can ne'er with reunions compete.



~There is a Proper Way for Doing Everything~

  In hewing an axe-shaft, how must you act?
    Another axe take, or you'll never succeed.
  In taking a wife, be sure 'tis a fact,
    That with no go-between you never can speed.

  In hewing an axe-shaft, hewing a shaft,
    For a copy you have the axe in your hand.

  In choosing a wife, you follow the craft,
    And forthwith on the mats the feast-vessels stand.



PART II.--MINOR ODES TO THE KINGDOM


BOOK I



DECADE OF LUH MING


~A Festal Ode~

  With sounds of happiness the deer
    Browse on the celery of the meads.
  A nobler feast is furnished here,
    With guests renowned for noble deeds.
  The lutes are struck; the organ blows,
    Till all its tongues in movement heave.
  Each basket loaded stands, and shows
    The precious gifts the guests receive.
  They love me and my mind will teach,
  How duty's highest aim to reach.

  With sounds of happiness the deer
    The southern-wood crop in the meads,
  What noble guests surround me here,
    Distinguished for their worthy deeds!
  From them my people learn to fly
    Whate'er is mean; to chiefs they give
  A model and a pattern high;--
    They show the life they ought to live.
  Then fill their cups with spirits rare,
  Till each the banquet's joy shall share.

  With sounds of happiness the deer
    The salsola crop in the fields.
  What noble guests surround me here!
    Each lute for them its music yields.
  Sound, sound the lutes, or great or small.
    The joy harmonious to prolong;--

  And with my spirits rich crown all
    The cups to cheer the festive throng.
  Let each retire with gladdened heart,
  In his own sphere to play his part.



~A Festal Ode Complimenting an Officer~

  On dashed my four steeds, without halt, without stay,
  Though toilsome and winding from Chow was the way.
  I wished to return--but the monarch's command
  Forbade that his business be done with slack hand;
    And my heart was with sadness oppressed.

  On dashed my four steeds; I ne'er slackened the reins.
  They snorted and panted--all white, with black manes.
  I wished to return, but our sovereign's command
  Forbade that his business be done with slack hand;--
    And I dared not to pause or to rest.

  Unresting the Filial doves speed in their flight,
  Ascending, then sweeping swift down from the height,
  Now grouped on the oaks. The king's high command
  Forbade that his business be done with slack hand;--
    And my father I left, sore distressed.

  Unresting the Filial doves speed in their flight,
  Now fanning the air and anon they alight
  On the medlars thick grouped. But our monarch's command
  Forbade that his business be done with slack hand;--
    Of my mother I thought with sad breast.

  My four steeds I harnessed, all white and black-maned,
  Which straight on their way, fleet and emulous strained.
  I wished to return; and now venture in song
  The wish to express, and announce how I long
    For my mother my care to attest.


[NOTE.--Both Maou and Choo agree that this ode was composed in
honor of the officer who narrates the story in it, although they say it
was not written by the officer himself, but was put into his mouth, as
it were, to express the sympathy of his entertainer with him, and the
appreciation of his devotion to duty.]



~The Value of Friendship~

  The woodmen's blows responsive ring,
    As on the trees they fall;
  And when the birds their sweet notes sing,
    They to each other call.
  From the dark valley comes a bird,
    And seeks the lofty tree.
  _Ying_ goes its voice, and thus it cries,
    "Companion, come to me."
  The bird, although a creature small,
    Upon its mate depends;
  And shall we men, who rank o'er all,
    Not seek to have our friends?
  All spirits love the friendly man,
    And hearken to his prayer.
  What harmony and peace they can
    Bestow, his lot shall share.

  _Hoo-hoo_ the woodmen all unite
    To shout, as trees they fell.
  They do their work with all their might;--
    What I have done I'll tell.
  I've strained and made my spirits clear,
    The fatted lambs I've killed.
  With friends who my own surname bear,
    My hall I've largely filled.
  Some may be absent, casually,
    And leave a broken line;
  But better this than absence by
    An oversight of mine.
  My court I've sprinkled and swept clean,
    Viands in order set.
  Eight dishes loaded stand with grain;
    There's store of fatted meat.
  My mother's kith and kin I'm sure
    I've widely called by name.
  That some be hindered better is
    Than ~I~ give cause for blame.

  On the hill-side the trees they fell,
    All working with good-will
  I labor too, with equal zeal.
    And the host's part fulfil.
  Spirits I've set in order meet,
    The dishes stand in rows.
  The guests are here; no vacant seat
    A brother absent shows.
  The loss of kindly feeling oft
    From slightest things shall grow,
  Where all the fare is dry and spare,
    Resentments fierce may glow.
  My store of spirits is well strained,
    If short prove the supply,
  My messengers I straightway send,
    And what is needed buy.
  I beat the drums, and in the dance
    Lead joyously the train.
  Oh! good it is, when falls the chance
    The sparkling cup to drain.



~The Response to a Festal Ode~

  Heaven shields and sets thee fast.
  It round thee fair has cast
    Thy virtue pure.
  Thus richest joy is thine;--
  Increase of corn and wine,
  And every gift divine,
    Abundant, sure.

  Heaven shields and sets thee fast.
  From it thou goodness hast;
    Right are thy ways.
  Its choicest gifts 'twill pour,
  That last for evermore,
  Nor time exhaust the store
    Through endless days.

  Heaven shields and sets thee fast,
  Makes thine endeavor last
    And prosper well.
  Like hills and mountains high,
  Whose masses touch the sky;
  Like streams aye surging by;
    Thine increase swell!

  With rite and auspice fair,
  Thine offerings thou dost bear,
    And son-like give,
  The season's round from spring,
  To olden duke and king,
  Whose words to thee we bring:--
    "Forever live,"

  The spirits of thy dead
  Pour blessings on thy head,
    Unnumbered sweet.
  Thy subjects, simple, good,
  Enjoy their drink and food.
  Our tribes of every blood
    Follow thy feet.

  Like moons that wax in light;
  Or suns that scale the height;
    Or ageless hill;
  Nor change, nor autumn know;
  As pine and cypress grow;
  The sons that from thee flow
    Be lasting still!



~An Ode of Congratulation~

  The russet pear-tree stands there all alone;
  How bright the growth of fruit upon it shown!
  The King's affairs no stinting hands require,
  And days prolonged still mock our fond desire.
  But time has brought the tenth month of the year;
  My woman's heart is torn with wound severe.
  Surely my warrior lord might now appear!

  The russet pear-tree stands there all alone;
  How dense the leafy shade all o'er it thrown!
  The King's affairs require no slackening hand,
  And our sad hearts their feelings can't command.
  The plants and trees in beauty shine; 'tis spring.
  From off my heart its gloom I fain would fling.
  This season well my warrior home may bring!

  I climbed that northern hill, and medlars sought;
  The spring nigh o'er, to ripeness they were brought.
  "The King's affairs cannot be slackly done";--
  'Tis thus our parents mourn their absent son.
  But now his sandal car must broken be;
  I seem his powerful steeds worn out to see.
  Relief has gone! He can't be far from me!

  Alas! they can't have marched; they don't arrive!
  More hard it grows with my distress to strive.
  The time is passed, and still he is not here!
  My sorrows multiply; great is my fear.
  But lo! by reeds and shell I have divined,
  That he is near, they both assure my mind;--
  Soon at my side my warrior I shall find!



~An Ode on the Return of the Troops~

  Forth from the city in our cars we drove,
    Until we halted at the pasture ground.
  The general came, and there with ardor strove
    A note of zeal throughout the host to sound.
    "Direct from court I come, by orders bound
  The march to hasten";--it was thus he spake.
    Then with the carriage-officers around,
  He strictly charged them quick despatch to make:--
  "Urgent the King's affairs, forthwith the field we take."

  While there we stopped, the second corps appeared,
    And 'twixt Us and the city took its place.
  The guiding standard was on high upreared,
    Where twining snakes the tortoises embrace,
    While oxtails, crest-like, did the staff's top grace.
  We watched the sheet unfolding grandly wave;
    Each flag around showed falcons on its face.

  With anxious care looked on our leader brave;
  Watchful the carriage-officers appeared and grave.

  Nan Chung, our chief, had heard the royal call
    To go where inroad by Heen-yuns was made,
  And 'cross the frontier build a barrier wall.
    Numerous his chariots, splendidly arrayed!
    The standards--this where dragons were displayed,
  And that where snakes round tortoises were coiled--
    Terrific flew. "Northward our host," he said,
  "Heaven's son sends forth to tame the Heen-yun wild."
  Soon by this awful chief would all their tribes be foiled.

  When first we took the field, and northward went,
    The millet was in flower;--a prospect sweet.
  Now when our weary steps are homeward bent,
    The snow falls fast, the mire impedes our feet.
    Many the hardships we were called to meet,
  Ere the King's orders we had all fulfilled.
    No rest we had; often our friends to greet
  The longing came; but vain regrets we stilled;
  By tablets stern our hearts with fresh resolve were thrilled.

  "Incessant chirp the insects in the grass;
    All round about the nimble hoppers spring.
  From them our thoughts quick to our husbands pass?
    Although those thoughts our hearts with anguish wring.
    Oh! could we see them, what relief 'twould bring!
  Our hearts, rejoiced, at once would feel at rest."
    Thus did our wives, their case deploring, sing;
  The while our leader farther on had pressed,
  And smitten with his power the wild Jung of the west.

  The spring days now are lengthening out their light;
    The plants and trees are dressed in living green;
  The orioles resting sing, or wing their flight;
    Our wives amid the southern-wood are seen,
    Which white they bring, to feed their silkworms keen.
  Our host, returned, sweeps onwards to the hall,
    Where chiefs are questioned, shown the captives mean
  Nan Chung, majestic, draws the gaze of all,
  Proud o'er the barbarous foe his victories to recall.



BOOK II



THE DECADE OF PIH H'WA



~An Ode Appropriate to a Festivity~

  The dew lies heavy all around,
  Nor, till the sun shines, leaves the ground.
  Far into night we feasting sit;
  We drink, and none his place may quit.

  The dew lies heavy, and its gems
  Stud the luxuriant, grassy stems.
  The happy night with wassail rings;
  So feasted here the former kings.

  The jujube and the willow-tree
  All fretted with the dew we see.
  Each guest's a prince of noble line,
  In whom the virtues all combine.

  The _t'ung_ and _e_ their fruits display,
  Pendant from every graceful spray.
  My guests are joyous and serene,
  No haggard eye, no ruffled mien.



BOOK III



THE DECADE OF TUNG RUNG



~Celebrating a Hunting Expedition~

  Our chariots were well-built and firm,
    Well-matched our steeds, and fleet and strong.
  Four, sleek and large, each chariot drew,
    And eastward thus we drove along.

  Our hunting cars were light and good,
    Each with its team of noble steeds.
  Still further east we took the way
    To Foo-mere's grassy plains that leads.

  Loud-voiced, the masters of the chase
    Arranged the huntsmen, high and low.
  While banners streamed, and ox-tails flew,
    We sought the prey on distant Gaou.

  Each with full team, the princes came,
    A lengthened train in bright array.
  In gold-wrought slippers, knee-caps red,
    They looked as on an audience day.

  Each right thumb wore the metal guard;
    On the left arm its shield was bound.
  In unison the arrows flew;
    The game lay piled upon the ground.

  The leaders of the tawny teams
    Sped on their course, direct and true.
  The drivers perfect skill displayed;
    Like blow well aimed each arrow flew.

  Neighing and pleased, the steeds returned;
  The bannered lines back slowly came.
  No jostling rude disgraced the crowd;
  The king declined large share of game.

  So did this famous hunt proceed!
  So free it was from clamorous sound!
  Well does our King become his place,
And high the deeds his reign have crowned!



~The King's Anxiety for His Morning Levée~

  How goes the night? For heavy morning sleep
  Ill suits the king who men would loyal keep.
  The courtyard, ruddy with the torch's light,
  Proclaims unspent the deepest hour of night.
  Already near the gate my lords appear;
  Their tinkling bells salute my wakeful ear.

  How goes the night? I may not slumber on.
  Although not yet the night is wholly gone,
  The paling torch-light in the court below
  Gives token that the hours swift-footed go.
  Already at the gate my lords appear;
  Their tinkling bells with measured sound draw near.

  How goes the night? I may not slumber now.
  The darkness smiles with morning on its brow.
  The courtyard torch no more gives forth its ray,
  But heralds with its smoke the coming day.
  My princes pass the gate, and gather there;
  I see their banners floating in the air.



~Moral Lessons from Natural Facts~

  All true words fly, as from yon reedy marsh
  The crane rings o'er the wild its screaming harsh.
  Vainly you try reason in chains to keep;--
  Freely it moves as fish sweeps through the deep.

  Hate follows love, as 'neath those sandal-trees
  The withered leaves the eager searcher sees.
  The hurtful ne'er without some good was born;--
  The stones that mar the hill will grind the corn.

  All true words spread, as from the marsh's eye
  The crane's sonorous note ascends the sky.
  Goodness throughout the widest sphere abides,
  As fish round isle and through the ocean glides.
  And lesser good near greater you shall see,
  As grows the paper shrub 'neath sandal-tree.
  And good emerges from what man condemns;--
  Those stones that mar the hill will polish gems.



BOOK IV



THE DECADE OF K'E-FOO



~On the Completion of a Royal Palace~

  On yonder banks a palace, lo! upshoots,
    The tender blue of southern hill behind;
  Firm-founded, like the bamboo's clamping roots;
    Its roof made pine-like, to a point defined.
  Fraternal love here bears its precious fruits,
    And unfraternal schemes be ne'er designed!

  Ancestral sway is his. The walls they rear,
    Five thousand cubits long; and south and west
  The doors are placed. Here will the king appear,
    Here laugh, here talk, here sit him down and rest.

  To mould the walls, the frames they firmly tie;
    The toiling builders beat the earth and lime.
  The walls shall vermin, storm, and bird defy;--
    Fit dwelling is it for his lordly prime.

  Grand is the hall the noble lord ascends;--
    In height, like human form most reverent, grand;
  And straight, as flies the shaft when bow unbends;
    Its tints, like hues when pheasant's wings expand.

  High pillars rise the level court around;
    The pleasant light the open chamber steeps;
  And deep recesses, wide alcoves, are found,
    Where our good king in perfect quiet sleeps.

  Laid is the bamboo mat on rush mat square;--
    Here shall he sleep, and, waking, say, "Divine
    What dreams are good? For bear and grizzly bear,
    And snakes and cobras, haunt this couch of mine."

  Then shall the chief diviner glad reply,
    "The bears foreshow that Heaven will send you sons.
  The snakes and cobras daughters prophesy.
    These auguries are all auspicious ones.

  "Sons shall be his--on couches lulled to rest.
    The little ones, enrobed, with sceptres play;
  Their infant cries are loud as stern behest;
    Their knees the vermeil covers shall display.
  As king hereafter one shall be addressed;
    The rest, our princes, all the States shall sway.

  "And daughters also to him shall be born.
    They shall be placed upon the ground to sleep;
  Their playthings tiles, their dress the simplest worn;
    Their part alike from good and ill to keep,
  And ne'er their parents' hearts to cause to mourn;
    To cook the food, and spirit-malt to steep."



~The Condition of King Seuen's Flocks~

  Who dares to say your sheep are few?
    The flocks are all three hundred strong.
  Who dares despise your cattle too?
    There ninety, black-lipped, press along.
  Though horned the sheep, yet peaceful each appears;
  The cattle come with moist and flapping ears.

  These climb the heights, those drink the pool;
    Some lie at rest, while others roam.
  With rain-coats, and thin splint hats cool,
    And bearing food, your herdsmen come.
  In thirties, ranged by hues, the creatures stand;
  Fit victims they will yield at your command.

  Your herdsmen twigs and fagots bring,
    With prey of birds and beasts for food.
  Your sheep, untouched by evil thing,
    Approach, their health and vigor good.
  The herdsman's waving hand they all behold,
  And docile come, and pass into the fold.

  Your herdsmen dream;--fish take the place
    Of men; on banners falcons fly,
  Displacing snakes and tortoises.
    The augur tells his prophecy:--
  "The first betoken plenteous years; the change
  Of banners shows of homes a widening range."


BOOK V



THE DECADE OF SEAOU MIN



~A Eunuch Complains of His Fate~


  A few fine lines, at random drawn,
  Like the shell-pattern wrought in lawn
    To hasty glance will seem.
  My trivial faults base slander's slime
  Distorted into foulest crime,
    And men me worthless deem.

  A few small points, pricked down on wood,
  May be made out a picture good
    Of the bright Southern Sieve.
  Who planned, and helped those slanderers vile,
  My name with base lies to defile?
    Unpitied, here I grieve.

  With babbling tongues you go about,
  And only scheme how to make out
    The lies you scatter round.
  Hear me--Be careful what you say;
  People ere long your words will weigh,
    And liars you'll be found.

  Clever you are with changeful schemes!
  How else could all your evil dreams
    And slanders work their way?
  Men now believe you; by and by,
  The truth found out, each vicious lie
    Will ill for ill repay.

  The proud rejoice; the sufferer weeps.
  O azure Heaven, from out thy deeps
    Why look in silence down?
  Behold those proud men and rebuke;
  With pity on the sufferers look,
    And on the evil frown.

  Those slanderers I would gladly take,
  With all who help their schemes to make,
    And to the tigers throw.
  If wolves and tigers such should spare,
  Td hurl them 'midst the freezing air,
    Where the keen north winds blow.
  And should the North compassion feel
  I'd fling them to great Heaven, to deal
    On them its direst woe.

  As on the sacred heights you dwell,
  My place is in the willow dell,
    One is the other near.
  Before you, officers, I spread
  These lines by me, poor eunuch, made.
    Think not Mang-tsze severe.



~An Officer Deplores the Misery of the Time~

  In the fourth month summer shines;
  In the sixth the heat declines.
  Nature thus grants men relief;
  Tyranny gives only grief.
  Were not my forefathers men?
  Can my suffering 'scape their ken?

  In the cold of autumn days
  Each plant shrivels and decays.
  Nature then is hard and stern;
  Living things sad lessons learn.
  Friends dispersed, all order gone,
  Place of refuge have I none.

  Winter days are wild and fierce;
  Rapid gusts each crevice pierce.
  Such is my unhappy lot,
  Unbefriended and forgot!
  Others all can happy be;
  I from misery ne'er am free.

  On the mountains are fine trees;
  Chestnuts, plum-trees, there one sees.
  All the year their forms they show;
  Stately more and more they grow.
  Noble turned to ravening thief!
  What the cause? This stirs my grief.

  Waters from that spring appear
  Sometimes foul, and sometimes clear,
  Changing oft as falls the rain,
  Or the sky grows bright again.
  New misfortunes every day
  Still befall me, misery's prey.

  Aid from mighty streams obtained,
  Southern States are shaped and drained.
  Thus the Keang and Han are thanked,
  And as benefactors ranked.
  Weary toil my vigor drains;
  All unnoticed it remains!

  Hawks and eagles mount the sky;
  Sturgeons in deep waters lie.
  Out of reach, they safely get,
  Arrow fear not, nor the net.
  Hiding-place for me there's none;
  Here I stay, and make my moan.

  Ferns upon the hills abound;
  _Ke_ and _e_ in marshy ground.
  Each can boast its proper place,
  Where it grows for use or grace.
  I can only sing the woe,
  Which, ill-starred, I undergo.



~On the Alienation of a Friend~


  Gently and soft the east wind blows,
    And then there falls the pelting rain.
  When anxious fears pressed round you close,
    Then linked together were we twain.
  Now happy, and your mind at rest,
  You turn and cast me from your breast.

  Gently and soft the east wind blows,
    And then there comes the whirlwind wild.
  When anxious fears pressed round you close,
    Your bosom held me as a child.
  Now happy, and in peaceful state,
  You throw me off and quite forget.

  Gently and soft the east wind blows,
    Then round the rocky height it storms.
  Each plant its leaves all dying shows;
    The trees display their withered forms.
  My virtues great forgotten all,
  You keep in mind my faults, though small.


BOOK VI


THE DECADE OF PIH SHAN



~A Picture of Husbandry~

  Various the toils which fields so large demand!
  We choose the seed; we take our tools in hand.
  In winter for our work we thus prepare;
  Then in the spring, bearing the sharpened 'share,
  We to the acres go that south incline,
  And to the earth the different seeds consign.
  Soon, straight and large, upward each plant aspires;--
  All happens as our noble lord desires.

  The plants will ear; within their sheath confined,
  The grains will harden, and be good in kind.
  Nor darnel these, nor wolf's-tail grass infests;
  From core and leaf we pick the insect pests,
  And pick we those that eat the joints and roots:--
  So do we guard from harm the growing fruits.
  May the great Spirit, whom each farmer names,
  Those insects take, and cast them to the flames!

  The clouds o'erspread the sky in masses dense,
  And gentle rain down to the earth dispense.
  First may the public fields the blessing get,
  And then with it our private fields we wet!
  Patches of unripe grain the reaper leaves;
  And here and there ungathered are the sheaves.
  Handfuls besides we drop upon the ground,
  And ears untouched in numbers lie around;--

  These by the poor and widows shall be found.
  When wives and children to the toilers come,
  Bringing provisions from each separate home,
  Our lord of long descent shall oft appear;
  The Inspector also, glad the men to cheer.
  They too shall thank the Spirits of the air,
  With sacrifices pure for all their care;
  Now red, now black, the victims that they slay,
  As North or South the sacrifice they pay;
  While millet bright the altars always show;--
  And we shall thus still greater blessings know.



~The Complaint of an Officer~

  O Heaven above, before whose light
  Revealed is every deed and thought,
     To thee I cry.
  Hither on toilsome service brought,
  In this wild K'ew I watch time's flight,
     And sadly sigh.
  The second month had just begun,
  When from the east we took our way.
     Through summer hot
  We passed, and many a wintry day.
  Summer again its course has run.
     O bitter lot!
  There are my compeers, gay at court,
  While here the tears my face begrime.
     I'd fain return--
  But there is that dread net for crime!
  The fear of it the wish cuts short.
     In vain I burn!

  Ere we the royal city left,
  The sun and moon renewed the year.
     We marched in hope.
  Now to its close this year is near.
  Return deferred, of hope bereft,
     All mourn and mope.
  My lonesome state haunts aye my breast,
  While duties grow, and cares increase,
     Too hard to bear.

  Toils that oppress me never cease;
  Not for a moment dare I rest,
    Nigh to despair.
  I think with fond regard of those,
  Who in their posts at court remain,
    My friends of old.
  Fain would I be with them again,
  But fierce reproof return would cause.
    This post I hold.

  When for the West I left my home,
  The sun and moon both mildly shone,
    Our hearts to cheer.
  We'd soon be back, our service done!
  Alas! affairs more urgent come,
    And fix us here.
  The year is hastening to expire.
  We gather now the southern-wood,
    The beans we reap;--
  That for its fragrance, these for food.
  Such things that constant care require
    Me anxious keep.
  Thinking of friends still at their posts,
  I rise and pass the night outside,
    So vexed my mind.
  But soon what changes may betide?
  I here will stay, whate'er it costs,
    And be resigned.

  My honored friends, O do not deem
  Your rest which seems secure from ill
    Will ever last!
  Your duties quietly fulfil,
  And hold the upright in esteem,
    With friendship fast.
  So shall the Spirits hear your cry,
  You virtuous make, and good supply,
    In measure vast.

  My honored friends, O do not deem
  Repose that seems secure from ill
    Will lasting prove.
  Your duties quietly fulfil,
  And hold the upright in esteem,
    With earnest love.
  So shall the Spirits hear your prayer,
  And on you happiness confer,
    Your hopes above.


BOOK VII



DECADE OF SANG HOO



~The Rejoicings of a Bridegroom~

  With axle creaking, all on fire I went,
   To fetch my young and lovely bride.
  No thirst or hunger pangs my bosom rent--
   I only longed to have her by my side.
  I feast with her, whose virtue fame had told,
  Nor need we friends our rapture to behold.

  The long-tailed pheasants surest covert find,
   Amid the forest on the plain.
  Here from my virtuous bride, of noble mind,
   And person tall, I wisdom gain.
  I praise her while we feast, and to her say,
  "The love I bear you ne'er will know decay.

  "Poor we may be; spirits and viands fine
   My humble means will not afford.
  But what we have, we'll taste and not repine;
   From us will come no grumbling word.
  And though to you no virtue I can add,
  Yet we will sing and dance, in spirit glad.

  "I oft ascend that lofty ridge with toil,
   And hew large branches from the oaks;
  Then of their leafy glory them I spoil,
   And fagots form with vigorous strokes.
  Returning tired, your matchless grace I see,
  And my whole soul dissolves in ecstasy.

  "To the high hills I looked, and urged each steed;
   The great road next was smooth and plain.

  Up hill, o'er dale, I never slackened speed;
    Like lute-string sounded every rein.
  I knew, my journey ended, I should come
  To you, sweet bride, the comfort of my home."



~Against Listening to Slanderers~

  Like the blueflies buzzing round,
    And on the fences lighting,
  Are the sons of slander found,
    Who never cease their biting.
  O thou happy, courteous king,
  To the winds their slanders fling.

  Buzzing round the blueflies hear,
    About the jujubes flocking!
  So the slanderers appear,
    Whose calumnies are shocking.
  By no law or order bound,
  All the kingdom they confound.

  How they buzz, those odious flies,
    Upon the hazels clust'ring!
  And as odious are the lies
    Of those slanderers blust'ring.
  Hatred stirred between us two
  Shows the evil they can do.



BOOK VIII



THE DECADE OF TOO JIN SZE



~In Praise of By-gone Simplicity~


  In the old capital they stood,
    With yellow fox-furs plain,
  Their manners all correct and good,
    Speech free from vulgar stain.
  Could we go back to Chow's old days,
  All would look up to them with praise.

  In the old capital they wore
    _T'ae_ hats and black caps small;
  And ladies, who famed surnames bore,
    Their own thick hair let fall.
  Such simple ways are seen no more,
  And the changed manners I deplore.

  Ear-rings, made of plainest gold,
    In the old days were worn.
  Each lady of a noble line
    A Yin or Keih seemed born.
  Such officers and ladies now
  I see not and my sorrows grow.

  With graceful sweep their girdles fell,
    Then in the days of old.
  The ladies' side-hair, with a swell,
    Like scorpion's tail, rose bold.
  Such, if I saw them in these days,
  I'd follow with admiring gaze.

  So hung their girdles, not for show;--
    To their own length 'twas due.
  'Twas not by art their hair curled so;--
    By nature so it grew.
  I seek such manners now in vain,
  And pine for them with longing pain.

[NOTE.--Yin and Keih were clan names of great families, the ladies
of which would be leaders of fashion in the capital.]



~A Wife Bemoans Her Husband's Absence~

  So full am I of anxious thought,
  Though all the morn king-grass I've sought,
    To fill my arms I fail.
  Like wisp all-tangled is my hair!
  To wash it let me home repair.
    My lord soon may I hail!

  Though 'mong the indigo I've wrought
  The morning long; through anxious thought
    My skirt's filled but in part.
  Within five days he was to appear;
  The sixth has come and he's not here.
    Oh! how this racks my heart!

  When here we dwelt in union sweet,
  If the hunt called his eager feet,
    His bow I cased for him.
  Or if to fish he went away,
  And would be absent all the day,
    His line I put in trim.

  What in his angling did he catch?
  Well worth the time it was to watch
    How bream and tench he took.
  Men thronged upon the banks and gazed;
  At bream and tench they looked amazed,
    The triumphs of his hook.



~The Earl of Shaou's Work~

  As the young millet, by the genial rain
    Enriched, shoots up luxuriant and tall,
  So, when we southward marched with toil and pain,
    The Earl of Shaou cheered and inspired us all.

  We pushed our barrows, and our burdens bore;
    We drove our wagons, and our oxen led.
  "The work once done, our labor there is o'er,
    And home we travel," to ourselves we said.

  Close kept our footmen round the chariot track;
    Our eager host in close battalions sped.
  "When once our work is done, then we go back,
    Our labor over," to themselves they said.

  Hard was the work we had at Seay to do,
    But Shaou's great earl the city soon upreared.
  The host its service gave with ardor true;--
    Such power in all the earl's commands appeared!

  We did on plains and low lands what was meet;
    We cleared the springs and streams, the land to drain.
  The Earl of Shaou announced his work complete,
    And the King's heart reposed, at rest again.



~The Plaint of King Yew's Forsaken Wife~

  The fibres of the white-flowered rush
    Are with the white grass bound.
  So do the two together go,
    In closest union found.
  And thus should man and wife abide,
    The twain combined in one;
  But this bad man sends me away,
    And bids me dwell alone.

  Both rush and grass from the bright clouds
    The genial dew partake.

  Kind and impartial, nature's laws
    No odious difference make.
  But providence appears unkind;
    Events are often hard.
  This man, to principle untrue,
    Denies me his regard.

  Northward the pools their waters send,
    To flood each paddy field;
  So get the fields the sap they need,
    Their store of rice to yield.
  But that great man no deed of grace
    Deigns to bestow on me.
  My songs are sighs. At thought of him
    My heart aches wearily.

  The mulberry branches they collect,
    And use their food to cook;
  But I must use a furnace small,
    That pot nor pan will brook.
  So me that great man badly treats,
    Nor uses as his wife,
  Degrades me from my proper place,
    And fills with grief my life.

  The bells and drums inside the court
    Men stand without and hear;
  So should the feelings in my breast,
    To him distinct appear.
  All-sorrowful, I think of him,
    Longing to move his love;
  But he vouchsafes no kind response;
    His thoughts far from me rove.

  The marabow stands on the dam,
    And to repletion feeds;
  The crane deep in the forest cries,
    Nor finds the food it needs.
  So in my room the concubine
    By the great man is placed;
  While I with cruel banishment
    Am cast out and disgraced.

  The yellow ducks sit on the dam,
     With left wing gathered low;
  So on each other do they lean,
     And their attachment show.
  And love should thus the man and wife
     In closest concord bind;
  But that man turns away from me,
     And shows a fickle mind.

  When one stands on a slab of stone,
     No higher than the ground,
  Nothing is added to his height;--
     Low with the stone he's found.
  So does the favorite's mean estate
     Render that great man mean,
  While I by him, to distance sent,
     Am pierced with sorrow keen.



~Hospitality~

  A few gourd leaves that waved about
     Cut down and boiled;--the feast how spare!
  But the good host his spirits takes,
     Pours out a cup, and proves them rare.

  A single rabbit on the mat,
     Or baked, or roast:--how small the feast!
  But the good host his spirits takes,
     And fills the cup of every guest.

  A single rabbit on the mat,
     Roasted or broiled:--how poor the meal!
  But the guests from the spirit vase
     Fill their host's cup, and drink his weal.

  A single rabbit on the mat,
     Roasted or baked:--no feast we think!
  But from the spirit vase they take,
     Both host and guests, and joyous drink.



~On the Misery of Soldiers~

  Yellow now is all the grass;
  All the days in marching pass.
  On the move is every man;
  Hard work, far and near, they plan.

  Black is every plant become;
  Every man is torn from home.
  Kept on foot, our state is sad;--
  As if we no feelings had!

  Not rhinoceroses we!
  Tigers do we care to be?
  Fields like these so desolate
  Are to us a hateful fate.

  Long-tailed foxes pleased may hide
  'Mong the grass, where they abide.
  We, in box carts slowly borne,
  On the great roads plod and mourn.



PART III.--GREATER ODES OF THE KINGDOM



BOOK I



DECADE OF KING WAN


~Celebrating King Wan~

  The royal Wan now rests on high,
  Enshrined in brightness of the sky.
  Chow as a state had long been known,
  And Heaven's decree at last was shown.
  Its lords had borne a glorious name;
  God kinged them when the season came.
  King Wan ruled well when earth he trod;
  Now moves his spirit near to God.

  A strong-willed, earnest king was Wan,
  And still his fame rolls widening on.
  The gifts that God bestowed on Chow
  Belong to Wan's descendants now.
  Heaven blesses still with gifts divine
  The hundred scions of his line;
  And all the officers of Chow
  From age to age more lustrous grow.

  More lustrous still from age to age,
  All reverent plans their zeal engage;
  And brilliant statesmen owe their birth
  To this much-favored spot of earth.
  They spring like products of the land--
  The men by whom the realm doth stand.
  Such aid their numerous bands supply,
  That Wan rests tranquilly on high.

  Deep were Wan's thoughts, sustained his ways;
  His reverence lit its trembling rays.
  Resistless came great Heaven's decree;
  The sons of Shang must bend the knee;--
  The sons of Shang, each one a king,
  In numbers beyond numbering.
  Yet as God spoke, so must it be:--
  The sons of Shang all bent the knee.

  Now each to Chow his homage pays--
  So dark and changing are Heaven's ways.
  When we pour our libations here,
  The officers of Shang appear,
  Quick and alert to give their aid:--
  Such is the service by them paid,
  While still they do not cast aside
  The cap and broidered axe--their pride.
  Ye servants of our line of kings,
  Remember him from whom it springs.

  Remember him from whom it springs;--
  Let this give to your virtue wings.
  Seek harmony with Heaven's great mind;--
  So shall you surest blessing find.
  Ere Shang had lost the nation's heart,
  Its monarchs all with God had part
  In sacrifice. From them you see
  'Tis hard to keep high Heaven's decree.

  'Tis hard to keep high Heaven's decree!
  O sin not, or you cease to be.
  To add true lustre to your name,
  See Shang expire in Heaven's dread flame.
  For Heaven's high dealings are profound,
  And far transcend all sense and sound.
  From Wan your pattern you must draw,
  And all the States will own your law.


[Book II. is omitted]


BOOK III [*]



DECADE OF TANG



~King Seuen on the Occasion of a Great Drought~

  Grand shone the Milky Way on high,
  With brilliant span athwart the sky,
    Nor promise gave of rain.
  King Seuen long gazed; then from him broke,
  In anguished tones the words he spoke.
    Well might he thus complain!
  "O Heaven, what crimes have we to own,
  That death and ruin still come down?
  Relentless famine fills our graves.
  Pity the king who humbly craves!
    Our miseries never cease.
  To every Spirit I have vowed;
  The choicest victim's blood has flowed.
  As offerings I have freely paid
  My store of gems and purest jade.
    Hear me, and give release!

  "The drought consumes us. As on wing
  Its fervors fly, and torment bring.
  With purest mind and ceaseless care
  My sacrifices I prepare.
  At thine own border altars, Heaven,
  And in my father's fane, I've given
    What might relief have found.
  What Powers above, below, have sway,
  To all my precious gifts I pay,
    Then bury in the ground.
  Yes, every Spirit has received
  Due honor, and, still unrelieved,
    Our sufferings greater grow.
  How-tseih can't give the needed aid,
  And help from God is still delayed!
  The country lies a ruined waste.
  O would that I alone might taste
    This bitter cup of woe!

  "The drought consumes us. Nor do I
  To fix the blame on others try.
  I quake with dread; the risk I feel,
  As when I hear the thunders peal,
    Or fear its sudden crash.
  Our black-haired race, a remnant now,
  Will every one be swept from Chow,
    As by the lightning's flash.
  Nor I myself will live alone.
  God from his great and heavenly throne
    Will not spare even me.
  O friends and officers, come, blend
  Your prayers with mine; come, lowly bend.
  Chow's dynasty will pass away;
  Its altars at no distant day
    In ruins all shall be!

  "The drought consumes us. It keeps on
  Its fatal course. All hope is gone.
  The air more fierce and fiery glows.
  Where can I fly? Where seek repose?
    Death marks me for its prey.
  Above, no saving hand! Around,
  No hope, no comfort, can be found.
  The dukes and ministers of old
  Give us no help. Can ye withhold
  Your sympathy, who lately reigned?
  And parents, how are you restrained,
    In this so dreadful day?

  "The drought consumes us. There on high
  The hills are parched. The streams are dry.
  Drought's demon stalks abroad in ire,
  And scatters wide his flames and fire.
    Alas, my woful heart!
  The fires within its strength consume;
  The heat without creates a gloom
    That from it will not part.
  The dukes and ministers by-gone
  Respond not to my prayer and moan.
  God in great Heaven, permission give
  That I may in retirement live,
    And try to heal my smart!

  "The drought consumes us. Still I strive,
  And will not leave while I survive.
    Duty to shun I fear.
  Why upon me has come this drought?
  Vainly I try to search it out,
    Vainly, with quest severe.
  For a good harvest soon I prayed,
  Nor late the rites I duly paid,
  To Spirits of the air and land.
  There wanted nought they could demand,
    Their favor to secure.
  God in great heaven, be just, be kind!
  Thou dost not bear me in Thy mind.
  My cry, ye wisest Spirits, hear!
  Ye whom I constantly revere,
    Why do I this endure?

  "The drought consumes us. People fly,
  And leave their homes. Each social tie
    And bond of rule is snapt.
  The Heads of Boards are all perplexed;
  My premier's mind is sorely vexed;
    In trouble all are wrapt.
  The Masters of my Horse and Guards;
  My cook, and men of different wards:--
  Not one has from the struggle shrunk.
  Though feeling weak, they have not sunk,
    But done their best to aid.
  To the great sky I look with pain;--
  Why do these grievous sorrows rain
    On my devoted head?

  "Yes, at the mighty sky I gaze,
  And lo! the stars pursue their maze,
    And sparkle clear and bright.
  Ah! Heaven nor helps, nor seems to ken.
  Great officers and noble men,
  With all your powers ye well have striven,
  And reverently have sought from Heaven
    Its aid in our great fight.
  My death is near; but oh! keep on,
  And do as thus far you have done.
    Regard you only me?
  No, for yourselves and all your friends,
  On whom for rule the land depends,
    You seek security.
  I turn my gaze to the great sky;--
  When shall this drought be done, and I
    Quiet and restful be?"


[NOTE *: Selections from Book II. are omitted.--EDITOR.]



PART IV.--ODES OF THE TEMPLE AND ALTAR



BOOK I



SACRIFICIAL ODES OF CHOW



~Appropriate to a Sacrifice to King Wan~

  My offerings here are given,
    A ram, a bull.
  Accept them, mighty Heaven,
    All-bountiful.

  Thy statutes, O great king,
    I keep, I love;
  So on the realm to bring
    Peace from above.

  From Wan comes blessing rich;
    Now on the right
  He owns those gifts to which
    Him I invite.

  Do I not night and day,
    Revere great Heaven,
  That thus its favor may
    To Chow be given?



~On Sacrificing to the Kings Woo, Ching, and K'ang~

  The arm of Woo was full of might;
    None could his fire withstand;
  And Ching and K'ang stood forth to sight,
    As kinged by God's own hand.

  We err not when we call them sage.
    How grandly they maintained
  Their hold of all the heritage
    That Wan and Woo had gained!

  As here we worship, they descend,
    While bells and drums resound,
  And stones and lutes their music blend.
    With blessings we are crowned.

  The rites correctly we discharge;
    The feast we freely share.
  Those Sires Chow's glory will enlarge,
    And ever for it care.